# doi_10_1021-acs_est_5c06771

**Source PDF**: doi_10_1021-acs_est_5c06771.pdf

---

## Page 1

Recently Viewedclose modal
Skip to articleSkip to sidebar
•  ACS
•  ACS Publications
•  C&EN
•  CAS
Access through institution
Log In
[image]
[image]
Pseudomonas sp. Strain 273 Metabolizes Decanes with Poly- or
Perfluorinated Carbons
•  Cite
○  Citation
○  Citation and abstract
○  Citation and references
○  More citation options
•  Share
Share on
○  Facebook
○  X
○  Wechat
○  LinkedIn
○  Reddit
○  Email
○  Bluesky
•  Jump to
•  ExpandCollapse
Back to top
Close quick search formclearsearch
Environ. Sci. Technol.All Publications/Website

## Page 2

Advanced Search
•  Read
○  JournalsPeer-reviewed chemistry research
○  SubjectsSpecific research topics from across the ACS
portfolio
○  Books & ReferenceseBooks, monographs, and references
○  C&ENNews and analysis in chemistry and chemical
engineering
•  Publish
○  Submit a ManuscriptPrepare, submit, and track
manuscripts
○  Author ResourcesAuthor guidelines, templates,
publishing policies, and more
○  Purchase Author ServicesExpert editing, formatting,
and graphics support
○  Explore Open AccessOpen access tools, resources, and
news
•  Subscribe
○  Librarians & Account Managers
○  Open Science for Institutions
○  Inquire About Access
•  Help
○  Support FAQQuick answers to common questions
○  Live Chat with AgentGet real-time help from a support
representative
Open quick search formOpen menuClose menu
•  Read
○  Journals
○  Subjects
○  Books & References
○  C&EN

## Page 3

•  Publish
○  Submit a Manuscript
○  Author Resources
○  Purchase Author Services
○  Explore Open Access
•  Subscribe
○  Librarians & Account Managers
○  Open Science for Institutions
○  Inquire About Access
•  Help
○  Support FAQ
○  Live Chat with Agent
•  Account
○  Log in
○  My Profile
○  Log out
Close
Publications
CONTENT TYPES
•  All Types
SUBJECTS
Publications: All Types
Close
NextPrevious

## Page 4

[image][image]
Download Hi-Res ImageDownload to MS-PowerPointCite
This:Environ. Sci. Technol. 2025, 59, 42, 22663-22675
ADVERTISEMENT
•  Info
•  Metrics
Environmental Science & Technology
Vol 59/Issue 42
Article
[image]
•  Cite
○  Citation
○  Citation and abstract
○  Citation and references
○  More citation options
•  Share
Share on
○  Facebook
○  X
○  WeChat
○  LinkedIn
○  Reddit
○  Email
○  Bluesky
•  Jump to
•  ExpandCollapse
Bioremediation and BiotechnologyOctober 15, 2025
Pseudomonas sp. Strain 273
Metabolizes Decanes with Poly-

## Page 5

or Perfluorinated Carbons
Click to copy article linkArticle
link copied!
•  Alexander S. Walls
Alexander S. Walls
Department of Chemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, United States
More by Alexander S. Walls
•  Gao Chen
Gao Chen
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, United States
More by Gao Chen
[image]https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8767-3130
•  Diana Ramirez
Diana Ramirez
Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, United States
More by Diana Ramirez
•  Yongchao Xie
Yongchao Xie
State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource
Reuse, School of Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210023, China
More by Yongchao Xie
•  Broquell M. Wong
Broquell M. Wong
Department of Biochemistry & Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville,
Tennessee 37996, United States
More by Broquell M. Wong
•  Amanda L. May
Amanda L. May
Center for Renewable Carbon, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, United States

## Page 6

More by Amanda L. May
•  Anita Thapalia
Anita Thapalia
ExxonMobil Environmental and Property Solutions Company,
Spring, Texas 77389, United States
More by Anita Thapalia
•  Frank E. Löffler*
Frank E. Löffler
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, United States
Department of Biochemistry & Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville,
Tennessee 37996, United States
Department of Biosystems Engineering and Soil Science,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, United States
*[email protected]
More by Frank E. Löffler
[image]https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9797-4279
•  Shawn R. Campagna*
Shawn R. Campagna
Department of Chemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, United States
Biological Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Core,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, United States
*[email protected]
More by Shawn R. Campagna
[image]https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6809-3862
Other Access OptionsSupporting Information (2)
Environmental Science & Technology
Cite this: Environ. Sci. Technol. 2025, 59, 42, 22663–22675
Click to copy citationCitation copied!
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c06771
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5c06771
Published October 15, 2025

## Page 7

Publication History
•  
Received 
20 May 2025
•  
Accepted 
26 September 2025
•  
Revised 
25 September 2025
•  
Published 
online 15 October 2025
•  
Published 
in issue 28 October 2025
research-article
Copyright © 2025 American Chemical Society
Request reuse permissions
Abstract
Click to copy section linkSection link copied!
[image]
During growth with terminally monofluorinated decanes, the soil
isolate Pseudomonas sp. strain 273 releases inorganic fluoride and
channels fluorometabolites into glycerophospholipid biosynthesis.
We explored the ability of this bacterium to metabolize 1,1difluorodecane (F2-decane), 1,1,1-trifluorodecane (F3-decane), and
1,1,1,2,2-pentafluorodecane (F5-decane) to assess the impacts of
increasing degree of fluorination on organismal metabolism.
Growth occurred with all three polyfluorodecane substrates, and
inorganic fluoride release was observed in cultures amended with

## Page 8

F2-decane and F5-decane but not with F3-decane. Fluorine nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (19F NMR) detected
polyfluorinated C6 and C4 short-chain fatty acid catabolites
suggesting incomplete β-oxidation during catabolism by strain 273.
Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis
corroborated the formation of terminally poly- or perfluorinated
short-chain fatty acids. Ultrahigh performance liquid
chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS)
based global lipidome profiling revealed glycerophospholipids with
fluorine substitutions at the sn1/sn2 acyl chains and identified a
range of glycerophospholipids that contained between two and ten
fluorines depending on the growth substrate. These findings
advance our understanding of bacterial transformation of alkanes
with poly- and perfluorinated carbons and highlight the formation
of short-chain fluorinated fatty acids as catabloc products and
fluorophospholipids as anabolic products.
ACS Publications
Copyright © 2025 American Chemical Society
Subjects
what are subjects
Article subjects are automatically applied from the ACS Subject
Taxonomy and describe the scientific concepts and themes of the
article.
•  Acyls
•  Anions
•  Bacteria
•  Fluorine
•  Lipids
Keywords
what are keywords
Article keywords are supplied by the authors and highlight key
terms and topics of the paper.

## Page 9

•  Pseudomonas sp. strain 273
•  polyfluorinated alkanes
•  per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs)
•  metabolism
•  defluorination
•  fluorinated glycerophospholipids
•  fluoromembrane biosynthesis
Read this article
To access this article, please review the available access options
below.
Get instant access
Purchase Access
Read this article for 48 hours. Check out below using your ACS ID
or as a guest.
Purchase Access Restore my guest access
Recommended
Access through Your Institution
You may have access to this article through your institution.
Your institution does not have access to this content. Add or change
your institution or let them know you’d like them to include access.
 Explore subscriptions for institutions
Access Through Recommend Publication Institution Name Loading
Institutional Login Options... Access Through Your Institution
Add or Change Institution
Recommended

## Page 10

Log in to Access
You may have access to this article with your ACS ID if you have
previously purchased it or have ACS member benefits. Log in below.
Login with ACS ID
•  Purchase access
Purchase this article for 48 hours $48.00 Add to cart
Purchase this article for 48 hours Checkout
Supporting Information
Click to copy section linkSection link copied!
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://
pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c06771.
•  FISE analysis for averages of five replicates and controls
(Table S6), quantification of inorganic fluoride using 19F
NMR (Table S7), GP abundances for cells grown with F2decane, F3-decane, and F5-decane (Table S8),
glycerophospholipid abundances grown with decane (Table
S9), glycerophospholipid abundances of cells grown with F2decane (Table S10), glycerophospholipid abundances of cells
grown with F3-decane (Table S11), and glycerophospholipid
abundances of cells grown with F5-decane (Table S12) (XLSX)
•  Additional information for GC-MS analysis of polyfluorinated
short chain fatty acids, procedural details for Method H and
Method RP, formulae and equations, nomenclature of
compounds and glycerophospholipids, external standard
curves for mass balance analysis at time of inoculation
(Figure S1), external standard curves for mass balance
analysis following incubation (Figure S2), standards for 19F
NMR (Figure S3), abiotic controls for 19F NMR (Figure S4),
standard curve for inorganic fluoride analysis (Figure 5),

## Page 11

fluoride release in live cultures and control incubations
(Figure S6), volatility data regarding F5-decane (Figure S7),
GC-HRMS headspace analysis of F5-decane (Figure S8),
relative pool size changes of glycerophospholipid classes
(Figure S9), mass balance analysis for cells grown with F2decane (Table S1), mass balance analysis for cells grown with
F3-decane (Table S2), mass balance analysis for cells grown
with F5-decane (Table S3), mass balance analysis for cells
grown with F5-decane + decanoate (Table S4), cell
enumeration through qPCR (Table S5), and full 19F NMR
spectra (Figures SA1–SA26) (PDF)
•  es5c06771_si_001.xlsx (73.49 kb)
•  es5c06771_si_002.pdf (1.75 MB)
Terms & Conditions
Most electronic Supporting Information files are available without a
subscription to ACS Web Editions. Such files may be downloaded by
article for research use (if there is a public use license linked to the
relevant article, that license may permit other uses). Permission
may be obtained from ACS for other uses through requests via the
RightsLink permission system: http://pubs.acs.org/page/copyright/
permissions.html.
Cited By
Click to copy section linkSection link copied!
This article has not yet been cited by other publications.
[image]
Get e-Alerts
Get e-Alerts
Environmental Science & Technology

## Page 12

Cite this: Environ. Sci. Technol. 2025, 59, 42, 22663–22675
Click to copy citationCitation copied!
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5c06771
Published October 15, 2025
Publication History
•  
Received 
20 May 2025
•  
Accepted 
26 September 2025
•  
Revised 
25 September 2025
•  
Published 
online 15 October 2025
•  
Published 
in issue 28 October 2025
Copyright © 2025 American Chemical Society
Request reuse permissions
Article Views
408
Altmetric
-
Citations

## Page 13

-
Learn about these metrics
close
Article Views are the COUNTER-compliant sum of full text article
downloads since November 2008 (both PDF and HTML) across all
institutions and individuals. These metrics are regularly updated to
reflect usage leading up to the last few days.
Citations are the number of other articles citing this article,
calculated by Crossref and updated daily. Find more information
about Crossref citation counts.
The Altmetric Attention Score is a quantitative measure of the
attention that a research article has received online. Clicking on the
donut icon will load a page at altmetric.com with additional details
about the score and the social media presence for the given article.
Find more information on the Altmetric Attention Score and how
the score is calculated.
Recommended Articles
read
•  Journals
•  Books & References
•  C&EN
publish
•  Submit a Manuscript
•  Author Resources
•  Peer Review
•  Purchase Author Services
•  Explore Open Access
subscribe
•  Librarians & Account Managers

## Page 14

•  Open Science for Institutions
•  Inquire About Access
help
•  Support FAQ
•  Live Chat with Agent
resources
•  About ACS Publications
•  ChemRxiv
•  Blog
•  Events
•  Join ACS
•  For Advertisers
[image]
1155 Sixteenth Street N.W.Washington, DC 20036
Copyright © 2025 American Chemical Society.
•  Terms of Use
•  Privacy Policy
•  Accessibility
•  Facebook
•  X
•  Bluesky
•  YouTube
•  RSS

