# doi_10_1038-nature16174

**Source PDF**: doi_10_1038-nature16174.pdf

---

## Page 1

Skip to main content
Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version
with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we
recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off
compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to
ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
and JavaScript.
Advertisement
[image]
[image]
•  View all journals
•  
Search
•  Log in
•  Content Explore content
•  About the journal
•  Publish with us
•  Subscribe
•  Sign up for alerts
•  RSS feed
1. nature 
2. letters 
3. article
Show authors
•  Letter
•  Published: 06 January 2016

## Page 2

Slab melting as a barrier to
deep carbon subduction
•  Andrew R. Thomson
1,2,
•  Michael J. Walter1,
•  Simon C. Kohn1 &
•  …
•  Richard A. Brooker1 
Nature volume 529, pages 76–79 (2016)Cite this article
•  12k Accesses
•  425 Citations
•  34 Altmetric
•  Metrics details
Subjects
•  Geochemistry
•  Geology
•  Petrology
Abstract
Interactions between crustal and mantle reservoirs dominate the
surface inventory of volatile elements over geological time,
moderating atmospheric composition and maintaining a lifesupporting planet1. While volcanoes expel volatile components into
surface reservoirs, subduction of oceanic crust is responsible for
replenishment of mantle reservoirs2,3. Many natural, ‘superdeep’
diamonds originating in the deep upper mantle and transition zone
host mineral inclusions, indicating an affinity to subducted oceanic
crust4,5,6,7. Here we show that the majority of slab geotherms will
intersect a deep depression along the melting curve of carbonated

## Page 3

oceanic crust at depths of approximately 300 to 700 kilometres,
creating a barrier to direct carbonate recycling into the deep
mantle. Low-degree partial melts are alkaline carbonatites that are
highly reactive with reduced ambient mantle, producing diamond.
Many inclusions in superdeep diamonds are best explained by
carbonate melt–peridotite reaction. A deep carbon barrier may
dominate the recycling of carbon in the mantle and contribute to
chemical and isotopic heterogeneity of the mantle reservoir.
 Access through your institution
Buy or subscribe
This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution
Access options
 Access through your institution
Subscribe to this journal
Receive 51 print issues and online access
$199.00 per year
only $3.90 per issue
Learn more
Buy this article
•  Purchase on SpringerLink
•  Instant access to full article PDF
Buy now
Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during
checkout
Additional access options:

## Page 4

•  Log in
•  Learn about institutional subscriptions
•  Read our FAQs
•  Contact customer support
Figure 1: The melting curve of carbonated MORB compared to
hot and cold subduction geotherms26.
[image]
Figure 2: Composition of majoritic garnet minerals from
previous experimental studies, inclusions in diamonds and
reaction experiments.
[image]
Figure 3: Composition of ferropericlase minerals from previous
experimental studies, inclusions in diamonds and reaction
experiments.
[image]
Figure 4: Schematic of the deep mantle carbon cycle.
[image]
Similar content being viewed by others
[image]
The carbon isotopic signature of the upper mantle is
heterogeneous
Article Open access 04 January 2025
[image]
Carbonate-rich crust subduction drives the deep
carbon and chlorine cycles
Article 09 August 2023
[image]
A diamond-bearing core-mantle boundary on Mercury
Article Open access 14 June 2024

## Page 5

References
1. Zahnle, K. et al. Emergence of a habitable planet. Space Sci.
Rev. 129, 35–78 (2007)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
2. Sleep, N. H. & Zhanle, K. Carbon dioxide cycling and
implications for climate on ancient Earth. J. Geophys. Res.
106, 1373–1399 (2001)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
3. Dasgupta, R. & Hirschmann, M. M. The deep carbon cycle and
melting in Earth’s interior. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 298, 1–13
(2010)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
4. Harte, B. Diamond formation in the deep mantle: the record
of mineral inclusions and their distribution in relation to
mantle dehydration zones. Mineral. Mag. 74, 189–215 (2010)
CAS  Google Scholar 
5. Stachel, T. Diamonds from the asthenosphere and the
transition zone. Eur. J. Mineral. 13, 883–892 (2001)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
6. Thomson, A. R. et al. Origin of sub-lithospheric diamonds
from the Juina-5 kimberlite (Brazil): constraints from carbon
isotopes and inclusion compositions. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol.
168, 1081 (2014)
ADS  Google Scholar 
7. Bulanova, G. et al. Mineral inclusions in sublithospheric
diamonds from Collier 4 kimberlite pipe, Juina, Brazil:
subducted protoliths, carbonated melts and primary
kimberlite magmatism. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 160, 489–510

## Page 6

(2010)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
8. Shilobreeva, S., Martinez, I., Busigny, V., Agrinier, P. &
Laverne, C. Insights into C and H storage in the altered
oceanic crust: results from ODP/IODP Hole 1256D. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 75, 2237–2255 (2011)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
9. Alt, J. & Teagle, D. The uptake of carbon during alteration of
ocean crust. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 63, 1527–1535 (1999)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
10. Debret, B. et al. Redox state of iron during high-pressure
serpentinite dehydration. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 169, 36
(2015)
ADS  Google Scholar 
11. Kerrick, D. M. & Connolly, J. A. D. Metamorphic
devolatilization of subducted mid-ocean ridge metabasalts:
implications for seismicity, arc magmatism and volatile
recycling. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 189, 19–29 (2001)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
12. Poli, S., Franzolin, E., Fumagalli, P. & Crottini, A. The
transport of carbon and hydrogen in subducted oceanic crust:
an experimental study to 5 GPa. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 278,
350–360 (2009)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
13. Shcheka, S. S., Wiedenbeck, M., Frost, D. J. & Keppler, H.
Carbon solubility in mantle minerals. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.
245, 730–742 (2006)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar

## Page 7

14. Ghosh, S., Ohtani, E., Litasov, K. & Terasaki, H. Solidus of
carbonated peridotite from 10 to 20 GPa and origin of
magnesiocarbonatite melt in the Earth’s deep mantle. Chem.
Geol. 262, 17–28 (2009)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
15. Stagno, V., Ojwang, D. O., McCammon, C. A. & Frost, D. J.
The oxidation state of the mantle and the extraction of carbon
from Earth’s interior. Nature 493, 84–88 (2013)
ADS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
16. Kiseeva, E. S. et al. Metapyroxenite in the mantle transition
zone revealed from majorite inclusions in diamonds. Geology
41, 883–886 (2013)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
17. Ickert, R. B., Stachel, T., Stern, R. A. & Harris, J. W. Extreme
18O-enrichment in majorite constrains a crustal origin of
transition zone diamonds. Geochem. Persp. Lett. 1, 65–74
(2015)
Google Scholar 
18. Walter, M. J. et al. Primary carbonatite melt from deeply
subducted oceanic crust. Nature 454, 622–625 (2008)
ADS  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
19. Kiseeva, E. S., Litasov, K. D., Yaxley, G. M., Ohtani, E. &
Kamenetsky, V. S. Melting and phase relations of carbonated
eclogite at 9–21 GPa and the petrogenesis of alkali-rich melts
in the deep mantle. J. Petrol. 54, 1555–1583 (2013)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
20. Expedition 309/312 Scientists. Site 1256. In Superfast
Spreading Rate Crust 2 and 3 (eds Teagle, D. A. H. et al.) Vol.
309/312 of Proc. IODPhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2204/
iodp.proc.309312.103.2006 (Integrated Ocean Drilling

## Page 8

Program Management International, Inc., 2006)
21. Gale, A., Dalton, C. A., Langmuir, C. H., Su, Y. & Schilling, J.-
G. The mean composition of ocean ridge basalts. Geochem.
Geophys. Geosyst. 14, 489–518 (2013)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
22. Martin, A. M., Laporte, D., Koga, K. T., Kawamoto, T. &
Hammouda, T. Experimental study of the stability of a
dolomite + coesite assemblage in contact with peridotite:
implications for sediment-mantle interaction and diamond
formation during subduction. J. Petrol. 53, 391–417 (2012)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
23. Luth, R. W. Experimental determination of the reaction
aragonite + magnesite = dolomite at 5 to 9 GPa. Contrib.
Mineral. Petrol. 141, 222–232 (2001)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
24. Okamoto, K. & Maruyama, S. The Eclogite–Garnetite
transformation in the MORB + H2O system. Phys. Earth
Planet. Inter. 146, 283–296 (2004)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
25. Litasov, K., Shatskiy, A., Ohtani, E. & Yaxley, G. Solidus of
alkaline carbonatite in the deep mantle. Geology 41, 79–82
(2013)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
26. Syracuse, E. M., van Keken, P. E. & Abers, G. A. The global
range of subduction zone thermal models. Phys. Earth Planet.
Inter. 183, 73–90 (2010)
ADS  Google Scholar 
27. Hammouda, T. & Laporte, D. Ultrafast mantle impregnation
by carbonatite melts. Geology 28, 283–285 (2000)

## Page 9

ADS  Google Scholar 
28. Rohrbach, A. & Schmidt, M. W. Redox freezing and melting in
the Earth’s deep mantle resulting from carbon–iron redox
coupling. Nature 472, 209–212 (2011)
ADS  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
29. Brey, G. P., Bulatov, V., Girnis, A., Harris, J. W. & Stachel, T.
Ferropericlase—a lower mantle phase in the upper mantle.
Lithos 77, 655–663 (2004)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
30. Jackson, M. G. & Dasgupta, R. Compositions of HIMU, EM1
and EM2 from global trends between radiogenic isotopes and
major elements in ocean island basalts. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.
276, 175–186 (2008)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
31. Walter, M. J. Melting of garnet peridotite and the origin of
komatiite and depleted lithosphere. J. Petrol. 39, 29–60
(1998)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
32. Walter, M. J., Nakamura, E., Trönnes, R. G. & Frost, D. J.
Experimental constraints on crystallization differentiation in a
deep magma ocean. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 68, 4267–4284
(2004)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
33. Watson, E., Wark, D., Price, J. & Van Orman, J. Mapping the
thermal structure of solid-media pressure assemblies. Contrib.
Mineral. Petrol. 142, 640–652 (2002)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
34. Schilling, F. & Wunder, B. Temperature distribution in pistoncylinder assemblies: numerical simulations and laboratory

## Page 10

experiments. Eur. J. Mineral. 16, 7–14 (2004)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
35. McDade, P. et al. Pressure corrections for a selection of
piston-cylinder cell assemblies. Mineral. Mag. 66, 1021–1028
(2002)
CAS  Google Scholar 
36. Walter, M. J., Thibault, Y., Wei, K. & Luth, R. W.
Characterizing experimental pressure and temperature
conditions in multi-anvil apparatus. Can. J. Phys. 73, 273–286
(1995)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
37. Hernlund, J., Leinenweber, K., Locke, D. & Tyburczy, J. A. A
numerical model for steady-state temperature distributions in
solid-medium high-pressure cell assemblies. Am. Mineral. 91,
295–305 (2006)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
38. Nakamura, K. & Kato, Y. Carbonatization of oceanic crust by
the seafloor hydrothermal activity and its significance as a
CO2 sink in the Early Archean. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 68,
4595–4618 (2004)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
39. Coogan, L. a. & Gillis, K. M. Evidence that low-temperature
oceanic hydrothermal systems play an important role in the
silicate-carbonate weathering cycle and long-term climate
regulation. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 14, 1771–1786 (2013)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
40. Coogan, L. a. & Dosso, S. E. Alteration of ocean crust provides
a strong temperature dependent feedback on the geological
carbon cycle and is a primary driver of the Sr-isotopic
composition of seawater. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 415, 38–46

## Page 11

(2015)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
41. Kelley, K. A., Plank, T., Ludden, J. & Staudigel, H.
Composition of altered oceanic crust at ODP Sites 801 and
1149. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 4, 6 (2003)
Google Scholar 
42. Hammouda, T. High-pressure melting of carbonated eclogite
and experimental constraints on carbon recycling and storage
in the mantle. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 214, 357–368 (2003)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
43. Dasgupta, R., Hirschmann, M. M. & Withers, A. C. Deep
global cycling of carbon constrained by the solidus of
anhydrous carbonated eclogite under upper mantle
conditions. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 227, 73–85 (2004)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
44. Yaxley, G. M. & Green, D. H. Experimental demonstration of
refractory carbonate-bearing eclogite and siliceous melt in the
subduction regime. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 128, 313–325
(1994)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
45. Dasgupta, R., Hirschmann, M. M. & Dellas, N. The effect of
bulk composition on the solidus of carbonated eclogite from
partial melting experiments at 3 GPa. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol.
149, 288–305 (2005)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
46. Gerbode, C. & Dasgupta, R. Carbonate-fluxed melting of
MORB-like pyroxenite at 2.9 GPa and genesis of HIMU ocean
island basalts. J. Petrol. 51, 2067–2088 (2010)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar

## Page 12

47. Litasov, K. & Ohtani, E. The solidus of carbonated eclogite in
the system CaO–Al2O3–MgO–SiO2–Na2O–CO2 to 32 GPa and
carbonatite liquid in the deep mantle. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.
295, 115–126 (2010)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
48. Keshav, S. & Gudfinnsson, G. H. Experimentally dictated
stability of carbonated oceanic crust to moderately great
depths in the Earth: results from the solidus determination in
the system CaO–MgO–Al2O3–SiO2–CO2 . J. Geophys. Res.
115, B05205 (2010)
ADS  Google Scholar 
49. Molina, J. F. & Poli, S. Carbonate stability and fluid
composition in subducted oceanic crust: an experimental
study on H2O–CO2 bearing basalts. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.
176, 295–310 (2000)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
50. Connolly, J. A. D. Computation of phase equilibria by linear
programming: a tool for geodynamic modeling and its
application to subduction zone decarbonation. Earth Planet.
Sci. Lett. 236, 524–541 (2005)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
51. Manning, C. E. Geochemistry: a piece of the deep carbon
puzzle. Nature Geosci. 7, 333–334 (2014)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
52. Ague, J. J. & Nicolescu, S. Carbon dioxide released from
subduction zones by fluid-mediated reactions. Nature Geosci.
7, 355–360 (2014)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
53. Manning, C. E. The chemistry of subduction-zone fluids. Earth
Planet. Sci. Lett. 223, 1–16 (2004)

## Page 13

ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
54. Newton, R. C. & Manning, C. E. Quartz solubility in H2O–
NaCl and H2O–CO2 solutions at deep crust-upper mantle
pressures and temperatures: 2–15 kbar and 500–900 °C.
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 64, 2993–3005 (2000)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
55. Newton, R. C. & Manning, C. E. Solubility of enstatite +
forsterite in H2O at deep crust/upper mantle conditions: 4 to
15 kbar and 700 to 900 °C. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 66,
4165–4176 (2002)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
56. Newton, R. C. & Manning, C. E. Thermodynamics of SiO2–
H2O fluid near the upper critical end point from quartz
solubility measurements at 10 kbar. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.
274, 241–249 (2008)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar 
57. Kessel, R., Schmidt, M., Ulmer, P. & Pettke, T. Trace element
signature of subduction-zone fluids, melts and supercritical
liquids at 120–180 km depth. Nature 437, 724–727 (2005)
ADS  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
58. Stagno, V. et al. The oxygen fugacity at which graphite or
diamond forms from carbonate-bearing melts in eclogitic
rocks. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 169, 16 (2015)
ADS  Google Scholar 
59. Zedgenizov, D. A., Kagi, H., Shatsky, V. S. & Ragozin, A. L.
Local variations of carbon isotope composition in diamonds
from São-Luis (Brazil): evidence for heterogenous carbon
reservoir in sublithospheric mantle. Chem. Geol. 363, 114–
124 (2014)
ADS  CAS  Google Scholar

## Page 14

Download references
Acknowledgements
A.R.T. acknowledges the support of NERC grant NE/J500033/1.
M.J.W. and S.C.K. acknowledge the support of NERC grant NE/
J008583/1. We thank S. Kearns and B. Buse for their assistance
performing electron probe microanalyses and J. Blundy for
contributing ideas and expertise during discussions with the
authors.
Author information
Authors and Affiliations
1. School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8
1RJ, UK
Andrew R. Thomson, Michael J. Walter, Simon C.
Kohn & Richard A. Brooker
2. Department of Earth Sciences, University College London,
London, WC1E 6BT, UK
Andrew R. Thomson
Authors
1. Andrew R. Thomson
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
2. Michael J. Walter
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar

## Page 15

3. Simon C. Kohn
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
4. Richard A. Brooker
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
Contributions
A.R.T. designed, performed and analysed the experiments, gathered
data from the literature and wrote the manuscript as part of his PhD
studies. M.J.W. and S.C.K. provided training in experimental
techniques, assisted during interpretation of results, provided
advice and assisted with manuscript preparation in their roles as
A.R.T.’s PhD supervisors. R.A.B. provided training and assistance
with experimental techniques and sample preparation alongside
contributing to the scientific content and preparation of the
manuscript.
Corresponding author
Correspondence to Andrew R. Thomson.
Ethics declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Extended data figures and tables
Extended Data Figure 1 Comparison of experimental
compositions with natural rocks.

## Page 16

a–f, ‘Fresh’ MORB rocks (red field), ALL-MORB21 (red circle),
altered MORB rocks41 (pale blue circles), exhumed blueschist,
greenschist and/or eclogitic rocks (yellow circles) and starting
material from this (dark blue circle) and previous studies (green
circles) of carbonated MORB compositions. In a, rocks altered
MORB and exhumed rock compositions that fall on the Mg-Fe side
of the maj–cpx join from Extended Data Fig. 5 plot below the
dashed line, compositions that lie on the Ca side of this join are
plotted as orange circles with yellow outlines or purple circles with
blue outlines and sit above the dashed curve. This confirms that
magnesite will be the stable carbonate phase at high pressure in the
vast majority of natural crustal rocks, as is the case for ATCM1.
Data and corresponding references for this figure are provided in
the online source data file.
Source data
Extended Data Figure 2 Experimental results/phase
diagram and interpreted solidus position.
The reactions clinopyroxene + CO2 = dolomite + 2coesite and
dolomite = magnesite + aragonite are from refs 22 and 23
respectively. The upper left curve is the anhydrous MORB solidus.
Note that due to temperature gradients in experiments at 8 GPa, a
small quantity of dolomite is observed coexisting with melt in one
experiment above the solidus, present at the cold end of the
capsule. arag, aragonite; CM, carbonatite melt; cpx, clinopyroxene;
cs, coesite; dol, dolomite; gt, garnet; mag, magnesite; maj, majoritic
garnet; Na carb, Na carbonate; ox, FeTi oxide; SM, silicate melt; st,
stishovite.
Extended Data Figure 3 BSE images of experimental
products.
a, 7.9 GPa, 1,250 °C; b, 7.9 GPa, 1,350 °C; c, 13.1 GPa, 1,350 °C; d,
13.1 GPa; 1,450 °C; e, 20.7 GPa, 1,100 °C; f, 20.7 GPa, 1,480 °C; g,
20.7 GPa, 1,600 °C; h, sandwich experiment, 20.7 GPa, 1,400 °C.
Scale bars, 10 μm. CM, carbonatite melt; cpx, clinopyroxene; dol,
dolomite; FeTi, FeTi oxide; gt, garnet; mag, magnesite.

## Page 17

Extended Data Figure 4 Composition of experimental
melts from this study.
a, b, Experimental melts from selected previous studies marked
with semi-transparent greyscale symbols. b, The effects of
increasing pressure, temperature and the effect of contamination
due to partial analysis of silicate minerals surrounding small melt
pools are shown.
Extended Data Figure 5 The composition of
experimental phases from this study projected into
two quaternary plots.
a, b, [Ca]-[Mg+Fe2+]-[Si+Ti]-[Na+K] (a) and [Mg+Fe2+]-[Ca]-
[Al+Fe3+]-[Na+K] (b). In both diagrams the grey fields are the
compositional data projected onto the basal ternary. The red field is
the range of natural MORB compositions projected onto the basal
ternary. The yellow star plotted in the four-component system and
projected onto the basal ternary is ATCM1 (our bulk composition)
while the black stars are bulk compositions from previous
studies25,26,27.
Extended Data Figure 6 BSE images of reaction
experiments.
a–d, G169 (a, b) and G177 (c, d). In both experiments a reaction
zone and remaining carbonatite melt surrounds the unreacted
peridotite region. a, An overview of G169. b, A close up of the
reaction in G169 containing newly crystallized calcium perovskite,
majorite, ferropericlase and ringwoodite minerals. c, A close up of
the reaction products in G177, which consist of small bright
calcium perovskites, new majorite that is often observed as a rim on
relic peridotitic garnet and ringwoodite. d, An overview of G177.
CaPv, calcium perovskite; fper, ferropericlase; maj, majorite; rw,
ringwoodite; wad, wadsleyite.
Source data
Extended Data Figure 7 Raman spectra of minerals

## Page 18

from reaction experiment G177 measured using a
blue 455 cm−1 excitation laser.
The position of the main peaks in each collected spectrum have
been labelled with their shift from the excitation laser in cm−1.
Extended Data Figure 8 Comparison of diamondhosted calcium perovskite inclusions with
experimental mineral compositions in MgO versus Ti
number space.
Ti number = Ti/[Ca+Ti]. Data and corresponding references for
this figure are provided in the online source data file.
Extended Data Table 1 Starting materials used in this and
previous studies
Full size table
Extended Data Table 2 Summary of run conditions and
products for carbonated MORB melting experiments
Full size table
Extended Data Table 3 Summary of reaction experiments run
conditions and experimental products
Full size table
Supplementary information
Supplementary Tables
This file contains Supplementary Tables 1-5. (XLSX 146 kb)
PowerPoint slides
PowerPoint slide for Fig. 1
PowerPoint slide for Fig. 2

## Page 19

PowerPoint slide for Fig. 3
PowerPoint slide for Fig. 4
Source data
Source data to Fig. 1
Source data to Fig. 2
Source data to Extended Data Fig. 3
Source data to Extended Data Fig. 4
Rights and permissions
Reprints and permissions
About this article
[image]
Cite this article
Thomson, A., Walter, M., Kohn, S. et al. Slab melting as a barrier to
deep carbon subduction. Nature 529, 76–79 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature16174
Download citation
•  Received: 03 March 2015
•  Accepted: 19 October 2015
•  Published: 06 January 2016

## Page 20

•  Issue date: 07 January 2016
•  DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16174
Share this article
Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
content:
Get shareable link
Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.
Copy shareable link to clipboard
Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
This article is cited by
•  A critique of using epitaxial criterion to
discriminate between protogenetic and
syngenetic mineral inclusions in diamond
○  Marco Bruno
○  Stefano Ghignone
○  Fabrizio Nestola
Scientific Reports (2024)
•  Deep recycling of crustal materials by the Hainan
mantle plume: evidence from Zn–Sr–Nd–Pb
isotopes of Hainan Island basalts
○  Guangyue Cao
○  Ying Tong
○  Lei Wang
Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology (2024)

## Page 21

•  Carbonate-rich crust subduction drives the deep
carbon and chlorine cycles
○  Chunfei Chen
○  Michael W. Förster
○  Svyatoslav S. Shcheka
Nature (2023)
•  Cubic Fe-bearing majorite synthesized at 18–25
GPa and 1000 °C: implications for element
transport, subducted slab rheology and diamond
formation
○  Vincenzo Stagno
○  Luca Bindi
○  Piergiorgio Scarlato
Scientific Reports (2023)
•  Pervasive hydrous carbonatitic liquids mediate
transfer of carbon from the slab to the subarc
mantle
○  Wei Chen
○  Guoliang Zhang
○  Yuan Li
Communications Earth & Environment (2023)
 Access through your institution
Buy or subscribe
show all
Editorial Summary
Carbonate recycling into the deep mantle

## Page 22

Andrew Thomson et al. present experiments showing that
carbonated oceanic crust subducting into the mantle will intersect
the melting curve at depths of about 300 to 700 km, creating a
barrier to direct carbonate recycling into the deep mantle. The lowdegree partial melts produced would be highly reactive with
reduced ambient mantle, producing diamond. The authors conclude
that this deep carbon barrier may dominate the recycling of carbon
in the mantle and contribute to chemical and isotopic heterogeneity
of the mantle reservoir.
Associated content
Collection
Deep Carbon
Advertisement
[image]
Explore content
•  Research articles
•  News
•  Opinion
•  Research Analysis
•  Careers
•  Books & Culture
•  Podcasts
•  Videos
•  Current issue
•  Browse issues
•  Collections
•  Subjects
•  Follow us on Facebook

## Page 23

•  Follow us on Twitter
•  Subscribe
•  Sign up for alerts
•  RSS feed
About the journal
•  Journal Staff
•  About the Editors
•  Journal Information
•  Our publishing models
•  Editorial Values Statement
•  Journal Metrics
•  Awards
•  Contact
•  Editorial policies
•  History of Nature
•  Send a news tip
Publish with us
•  For Authors
•  For Referees
•  Language editing services
•  Open access funding
•  Submit manuscript
Search
Search articles by subject, keyword or author
Show results from All journals This journal
Search
Advanced search

## Page 24

Quick links
•  Explore articles by subject
•  Find a job
•  Guide to authors
•  Editorial policies
Nature (Nature)
ISSN 1476-4687 (online)
ISSN 0028-0836 (print)
nature.com sitemap
About Nature Portfolio
•  About us
•  Press releases
•  Press office
•  Contact us
Discover content
•  Journals A-Z
•  Articles by subject
•  protocols.io
•  Nature Index
Publishing policies
•  Nature portfolio policies
•  Open access
Author & Researcher services
•  Reprints & permissions
•  Research data

## Page 25

•  Language editing
•  Scientific editing
•  Nature Masterclasses
•  Research Solutions
Libraries & institutions
•  Librarian service & tools
•  Librarian portal
•  Open research
•  Recommend to library
Advertising & partnerships
•  Advertising
•  Partnerships & Services
•  Media kits
•  Branded content
Professional development
•  Nature Awards
•  Nature Careers
•  Nature Conferences
Regional websites
•  Nature Africa
•  Nature China
•  Nature India
•  Nature Japan
•  Nature Middle East
•  Privacy Policy
•  Use of cookies
•  Your privacy choices/Manage cookies
•  Legal notice
•  Accessibility statement
•  Terms & Conditions
•  Your US state privacy rights

## Page 26

[image]
© 2025 Springer Nature Limited
 Close
[image]

## Page 27

Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in
science, free to your inbox daily.
Email address
Sign up
I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the
Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.
 Close
Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your
inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing
[image]

