# fmicb-13-921635

**Source PDF**: fmicb-13-921635.pdf

---

## Page 1

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 07 July 2022
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.921635
Edited by:
Haichun Gao,
Zhejiang University, China
Reviewed by:
Xihui Shen,
Northwest A&F University, China
Kazuhide Kimbara,
Shizuoka University, Japan
*Correspondence:
Akio Tani
atani@okayama-u.ac.jp
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Microbial Physiology and Metabolism,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Microbiology
Received: 16 April 2022
Accepted: 09 June 2022
Published: 07 July 2022
Citation:
Juma PO, Fujitani Y, Alessa O,
Oyama T, Yurimoto H, Sakai Y and
Tani A (2022) Siderophore
for Lanthanide and Iron Uptake
for Methylotrophy and Plant Growth
Promotion in Methylobacterium
aquaticum Strain 22A.
Front. Microbiol. 13:921635.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.921635
Siderophore for Lanthanide and Iron
Uptake for Methylotrophy and Plant
Growth Promotion in
Methylobacterium aquaticum Strain
22A
Patrick Otieno Juma1, Yoshiko Fujitani1, Ola Alessa1, Tokitaka Oyama2,
Hiroya Yurimoto3, Yasuyoshi Sakai3 and Akio Tani1*
1 Institute of Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan, 2 Graduate School of Science, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan, 3 Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Methylobacterium and Methylorubrum species are facultative methylotrophic bacteria
that are abundant in the plant phyllosphere. They have two methanol dehydrogenases,
MxaF and XoxF, which are dependent on either calcium or lanthanides (Lns),
respectively. Lns exist as insoluble minerals in nature, and their solubilization and uptake
require a siderophore-like substance (lanthanophore). Methylobacterium species have
also been identiﬁed as plant growth-promoting bacteria although the actual mechanism
has not been well-investigated. This study aimed to reveal the roles of siderophore in
Methylobacterium aquaticum strain 22A in Ln uptake, bacterial physiology, and plant
growth promotion. The strain 22A genome contains an eight-gene cluster encoding
the staphyloferrin B-like (sbn) siderophore. We demonstrate that the sbn siderophore
gene cluster is necessary for growth under low iron conditions and was complemented
by supplementation with citrate or spent medium of the wild type or other strains
of the genera. The siderophore exhibited adaptive features, including tolerance to
oxidative and nitrosative stress, bioﬁlm formation, and heavy metal sequestration. The
contribution of the siderophore to plant growth was shown by the repressive growth of
duckweed treated with siderophore mutant under iron-limited conditions; however, the
siderophore was dispensable for strain 22A to colonize the phyllosphere. Importantly, the
siderophore mutant could not grow on methanol, but the siderophore could solubilize
insoluble Ln oxide, suggesting its critical role in methylotrophy. We also identiﬁed TonBdependent receptors (TBDRs) for the siderophore–iron complex, iron citrate, and Ln,
among 12 TBDRs in strain 22A. Analysis of the siderophore synthesis gene clusters
and TBDR genes in Methylobacterium genomes revealed the existence of diverse types
of siderophores and TBDRs. Methylorubrum species have an exclusive TBDR for Ln
uptake that has been identiﬁed as LutH. Collectively, the results of this study provide
insight into the importance of the sbn siderophore in Ln chelation, bacterial physiology,
and the diversity of siderophore and TBDRs in Methylobacterium species.
Keywords: Methylobacterium species, lanthanide, lanthanophore, siderophore, plant growth promoter, heavy
metal sequestration
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 2

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
INTRODUCTION
Methylobacterium
and
Methylorubrum
species
are
pinkpigmented bacteria capable of utilizing a variety of C1
compounds (Vuilleumier et al., 2009). These bacteria can
colonize a wide range of environments and are among the
most abundant bacterial genera associated with the plant
phyllosphere (Knief et al., 2010). Their phyllospheric abundance
can be attributed to their methylotrophy and the presence
of methanol, which is produced mainly as a byproduct of
plant pectin metabolism during cell wall synthesis (Fall and
Benson, 1996). The contribution of methanol to the colonization
was demonstrated by the reduced colonization capability of
methylotrophy-deﬁcient
Methylorubrum
extorquens
strain
AM1 mutants (Sy et al., 2005). Therefore, methylotrophy
provides a selective advantage to the genus over other bacterial
genera in the phyllosphere. Furthermore, the phyllosphere
colonization by Methylobacterium species has been shown to
vary with plant species, session, and growth stage (Omer et al.,
2004). Methylobacterium species have also been identiﬁed as
plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) (Tani et al., 2015;
Yurimoto et al., 2021) that enhance plant abiotic stress tolerance
(Kumar et al., 2019).
Methylobacterium species have been extensively studied for
methylotrophy in Gram-negative bacteria. Methanol is oxidized
to formaldehyde by pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent
methanol dehydrogenases (MDHs) (Anthony, 2004). Generally,
MDHs are classiﬁed into two types, MxaF and XoxF, which
utilize calcium and lanthanide (Ln) as cofactors, respectively
(Keltjens et al., 2014). Ln acts as the transcriptional activator that
induces the XoxF-MDH while repressing MxaF-MDH (Haque
et al., 2015). XoxF-MDH is more commonly conserved among
Methylobacterium species than MxaF-MDH, projecting Ln as an
integral mineral for methylotrophy (Alessa et al., 2021).
In nature, Ln occurs as mineral rocks that solubilize in
sub-nanomolar concentration (Brown et al., 1990). Ln must
be transported to the cytosol for Ln-dependent methanol
metabolism to occur. A total of 10 genes, including TonBdependent receptor (TBDR) and ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-
type transporter analogous to the siderophore-mediated iron
transport system, have been identiﬁed in the traﬃcking of Ln
in M. extorquens strain AM1 (Roszczenko-Jasi´nska et al., 2020).
Based on the inevitable need to enhance the bioavailability
of Ln and the similarity of Ln-iron uptake systems, an Ln
chelator termed lanthanophore has been fronted. Recently, gene
candidates for lanthanophore biosynthesis [lanthanide chelation
cluster (LCC)] were identiﬁed in strain AM1. The LCC cluster
resembled the genes for aerobactin synthesized in Grimontia
hollisae. However, the LCC cluster does not encode a complete
gene set for aerobactin synthesis. Therefore, the product of LCC
lanthanophore should be chemically and structurally diﬀerent
from aerobactin, although the chemically synthesized aerobactin
siderophore was shown to bind Ln (Zytnick et al., 2022).
Bacteria rely on siderophores to acquire iron. Siderophores
are low-molecular-weight compounds (200–2,000 Da) with a
high aﬃnity for iron (Ahmed and Holmström, 2014). They are
structurally diverse and classiﬁed into three main families based
on characteristic functional groups hydroxamate, catecholate,
and hydroxycarboxylate (Sah and Singh, 2015). Siderophores also
form stable complexes with other metal cations (Neubauer et al.,
2000), sequester heavy metals (Chaturvedi et al., 2012), regulate
oxidative stress (Adler et al., 2012), and provide antibacterial
activity (Braun et al., 2009). Once iron is chelated, the complex
is transported through a TBDR utilizing energy that is derived
from the proton motive force and transmitted from the TonBExbB-ExbD proteins (Noinaj et al., 2010). TBDRs have also been
reported to transport vitamin B12, saccharides, and aromatic
compounds (Fujita et al., 2019).
Siderophore production is one of the important bacterial
functions in plant–bacteria and bacteria–bacteria interaction
(Kramer et al., 2021); however, it has not been characterized well
in Methylobacterium species and few strains in the genus have
been reported to synthesize siderophores (Lacava et al., 2008).
The recent ﬁnding of the aerobactin-like LCC gene cluster in
strain AM1 showed that siderophores can play a critical role in
Ln acquisition, which leads to the induction and activation of a
novel enzyme, Ln-dependent XoxF-type MDHs. The mechanism
for Ln-dependent expression switching (Ln-switch) between
Ca2+-dependent MxaF and Ln-dependent XoxF is an important
research topic in bacterial methylotrophy, and the elucidation of
the siderophore function as lanthanophore is crucial to dissecting
the molecular mechanism of Ln-switch.
The genera Methylobacterium and Methylorubrum are diverse,
comprising 63 species and categorized into three major clades,
A, B, and C. Clade C has a diﬀerent methylotrophy gene
repertoire, including a lack of mxaF in some strains, signifying
the importance of the uptake of Ln in this group. This clade
also has a diﬀerent set of genes for C1 compound metabolism,
such as the glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase
pathway (Yanpirat et al., 2020), and is characterized by a high GCrich genome (Alessa et al., 2021). Methylobacterium aquaticum
strain 22A was isolated from Racomitrium japonicum (Tani et al.,
2012). The strain belongs to clade C and its complete genome
information is available (Tani et al., 2016). Strain 22A has plant
growth promotion capability, although the mechanism has not
yet been established. Siderophore is proposed to contribute to
the plant growth promotion eﬀect. In this paper, we investigate
the function of the staphyloferrin B-like siderophore from strain
22A in plant growth promotion, bacterial physiology, and its
involvement in methylotrophy. Furthermore, we aim to enhance
knowledge on siderophore synthesis and receptors, using the
genome information of all type strains of Methylobacterium and
Methylorubrum species (Alessa et al., 2021).
RESULTS
Gene Organization of Siderophore
Synthesis Cluster in Strain 22A Genome
The strain 22A genome contains a siderophore synthesis
cluster
composed
of
eight
genes
(Maq22A_c25425
to
Maq22A_c25465) with a similarity of 12% to the staphylobactin
cluster (BGC0000943) according to anti-SMASH analysis.
The strain 22A siderophore cluster, herein named sbnAH, also showed 33–56% identity to a well-characterized
hydroxycarboxylate-type staphyloferrin B cluster (sbnA-I) from
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 3

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
S. aureus (Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Figure 1)
(Cheung et al., 2009) and Ralstonia solanacearum (Bhatt and
Denny, 2004). The N- and C-terminal portions of SbnF of
strain 22A showed 34 and 33% similarity to sbnE and sbnF
of S. aureus, respectively, suggesting that sbnE and sbnF are
fused in strain 22A. Similar gene clusters were also found in six
other Methylobacterium type strains in a non-taxonomy-speciﬁc
manner. We hypothesized that the strain 22A sbn cluster
synthesizes a staphyloferrin B-like siderophore.
Staphyloferrin B is biosynthesized by the SbnA-SbnI encoded
by sbn gene cluster in Staphylococcus aureus (Cheung et al., 2009).
SbnA, SbnB, and SbnG generate L-diaminopropionic acid (LDAP), α-ketoglutarate (α-KG), and citrate, respectively, as the
siderophore precursors. SbnE condenses citrate and L-DAP to
citryl-DAP. SbnF condenses citryl-1,2-diaminoethane (DAE) and
L-DAP to L-DAP-citryl-DAE. SbnC catalyzes the amide linking
of the precursor and α-KG to produce staphyloferrin B (Cheung
et al., 2009). The sbn cluster is also proposed to synthesize a noncharacterized siderophore staphylobactin, which is larger than
staphyloferrin A or B by >300 Da (Dale et al., 2004).
Characterization of Siderophore Mutants
of Strain 22A
The
spent
medium
of
strain
22A
was
negative
for
catecholate and hydroxamate siderophore tests but positive
for
hydroxycarboxylate-type
siderophore
(Supplementary
Figure 2A). Knockout mutants for sbnC and sbnF that were
annotated as iucA/iucC family siderophore biosynthesis proteins
were constructed to generate 1sbnC, 1sbnF, and 1sbnCF.
Gene disruptants were also generated for the other individual
sbn genes and a hypothetical gene (Maq22A_c25465) at the
distal end of the cluster. Strain 22A wild type showed a positive
reaction on chrome azurol S (CAS) agar plate, which is indicative
of siderophore production whereas 1sbnA, 1sbnD, 1sbnF,
1sbnH, and 1sbnCF were negative (Supplementary Figure 2B).
The strain 22A sbn gene cluster contains two of the three
iucA/iucC family genes (sbnC and sbnF) involved in many
general non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS)-independent
siderophore (NIS) biosynthesis. NIS biosynthesis utilizes at least
one of these enzymes for siderophore synthesis as a crucial
component (Challis, 2005). Due to this important potential
role, we used 1sbnCF as a representative siderophore mutant
throughout this study.
The 1sbnC showed a reduced CAS reaction and a normal
growth, whereas 1sbnA, 1sbnD, 1sbnA, 1sbnD, and 1sbnCF
showed slower growth compared to the wild type, on succinate in
the presence of 100 µM FeSO4 (Figure 1A). The wild-type spent
medium complemented the growth of 1sbnCF (Figure 1B),
suggesting the inability of the siderophore synthesis of 1sbnCF.
Interestingly, 1sbnCF was able to grow on succinate in the
presence of iron citrate (>50 µM) (Figure 1C). Furthermore,
the combined supplementation of FeSO4 (50 µM) and citrate
rescued 1sbnCF in a citrate concentration-dependent manner
(Figure 1D). These results suggested that although the sbn
siderophore contributes to the utilization of FeSO4, strain 22A
has another mechanism to acquire iron citrate.
We cloned the promoter region of sbnA (PsbnA, 644 bp) into
pAT06, a promoter-reporter vector containing bacterial luciferase
genes as a reporter and introduced it into strain 22A wild type.
PsbnA showed high activity with 5 µM FeSO4 and low activity
with 100 µM FeSO4 or the presence of iron citrate (Figure 2).
This result suggested that sbn expression is induced by low iron
availability and repressed by iron citrate.
Siderophore Mediates the Interaction
With Plants
Although strain 22A has been identiﬁed as a potential PGPB
in ﬁeld and pot conditions (Tani et al., 2015), the growth
promotion mechanism has not yet been studied. We assessed the
contribution of siderophore to this plant–bacterial interaction.
We used duckweed (Lemna gibba p8L) as a plant model.
Strain 22A wild type and 1sbnCF were inoculated into 1/2
Murashige–Skoog (MS) medium under two iron regimes. The
wild type and 1sbnCF showed no plant growth promotion under
suﬃcient iron conditions (10 mg/l) (Figures 3A,B). In ironlimited conditions (1 mg/l), the wild-type strain 22A promoted
duckweed growth, whereas 1sbnCF suppressed the plant growth.
These results suggested that the growth promotion eﬀect is
dependent on iron availability, and the siderophore is directly
involved in its mechanism.
The
treated
plants
were
subjected
to
iron
content
measurement
with
inductively
coupled
plasma
mass
spectrometry (ICP-MS). The plants in suﬃcient iron conditions
contained almost constant iron levels irrespective of the
genotypes of strain 22A (Figure 3C), suggesting that there was
no competition for iron between the plants and the bacteria.
In iron-limited conditions where the plants showed relatively
smaller biomass, the plant iron content was increased by the
presence of the wild type, suggesting that strain 22A assisted in
iron acquisition in the plants. In the presence of 1sbnCF, the
plants contained lower iron compared to the treatment with the
wild type, and the 1sbnCF cells contained more iron than the
wild type. These results suggested that the mutant competed with
the plant for iron. Meanwhile, the bacterial cell mass assessed as
wet weight in these conditions showed no diﬀerence between the
wild type and 1sbnCF (Figure 3D).
The growth promotion eﬀect by the wild type was also
reproduced in Arabidopsis thaliana, under low iron conditions
(1 mg/l) (Supplementary Figure 3A), suggesting that the iron
dependency of the growth promotion eﬀect is not dependent
on plant species. A. thaliana was inoculated with a rifampicinresistant strain 22A (22A-rif) and a kanamycin-resistant 1sbnCF
(1sbnCF-km) individually or in co-inoculation under 1 mg/l
FeSO4 (Supplementary Figure 3B). 1sbnCF-km colonized the
plant phyllosphere better than 22A-rif in both conditions.
These results suggested that 1sbnCF could acquire iron in the
A. thaliana phyllosphere without the siderophore.
Sbn Siderophore Is Involved in Ln Uptake
and Ln-Dependent Methylotrophy
We tested whether the spent medium of the wild type can
solubilize insoluble Ln. La2O3 was suspended in the spent
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 4

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
FIGURE 1 | (A) Growth of M. aquaticum strain 22A wild type (WT), siderophore sbn gene mutants on succinate with FeSO4. (B) Growth of WT and 1sbnCF on
succinate with/without the addition of a spent medium (SM) of the WT. (C) Growth of WT and 1sbnCF on succinate in the presence of 100 µM FeSO4 or 100 µM
iron citrate. (D) Growth of WT and 1sbnCF on succinate in the presence of 50 µM FeSO4 and different concentrations of citrate. Bars, speciﬁc growth rate (µ, h−1);
circles, cell yield (OD600). All results are presented as the average ± standard deviation (SD) (biological triplicates).
medium of the wild type and 1sbnCF, followed by incubation for
24 h and quantiﬁcation of soluble La. We could detect a 24-folds
higher amount of La in the wild-type spent medium compared
to the non-inoculated medium and 1sbnCF spent medium
(Figure 4A), suggesting that sbn siderophore is involved in Ln
solubilization and chelation. We also conﬁrmed that >50 µM
citrate solubilized La2O3 (Figure 4B).
1mxaF can grow on methanol only in the presence of La3+,
due to intact XoxF (Masuda et al., 2018). 1mxaF containing the
PsbnA reporter vector was cultivated on succinate plus methanol
under various concentrations of LaCl3 and FeSO4. The promoter
activity was the control level in LaCl3 concentration in the range
of 0.3–30 µM under both 5 and 50 µM FeSO4 (Figure 4C).
A high concentration of LaCl3 (90 µM) activated PsbnA under
5 µM but not under 50 µM FeSO4, suggesting that LaCl3 created
iron scarcity, increasing the need for siderophore synthesis.
FIGURE 2 | sbnA promoter activity assay with luciferase as a reporter in the
wild type grown on succinate in the presence of 5 and 100 µM FeSO4 or iron
citrate. Bars, sbnA promoter activity (arbitrary unit, luminescence/OD600);
circles, cell yield (OD600). The results were presented as the
average ± standard deviation (SD) (biological triplicates).
To further examine the involvement of siderophore in Ln
solubilization, we generated 1mxaF1sbnCF. The wild type grew
on methanol utilizing FeSO4 or iron citrate and either forms
of La (LaCl3 or La2O3) (Figure 4D). Without the addition of
an iron source, the wild type could not grow, however, La
source omission did not aﬀect its growth (data not shown).
1mxaF growth on methanol was dependent on either of the La
forms and iron. 1sbnCF and 1mxaF1sbnCF could not grow
on methanol in all conditions, even under a high concentration
of iron citrate (100 µM) that could complement their growth
on succinate (Figure 1C). We also found that 1mxaF1sbnCF
was able to grow on methanol in the presence of LaCl3 and
the wild-type spent media (Figure 4E) or with citrate (but not
iron citrate) in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 4F).
These results suggested that siderophore is not required for
methylotrophic growth in the presence of citrate, but that it serves
as an Ln chelator in the absence of citrate, and that citrate also
chelates Ln for uptake.
We assessed the promoter activity of MDH genes (xoxF and
mxaF) in the wild type and 1sbnCF grown on methanol plus
succinate in the absence/presence of 30 µM LaCl3. The wild type
showed a clear Ln-dependent switch of MDH gene expression
(Figure 4G). In the presence of LaCl3, 1sbnCF showed more than
10 times higher activity of PxoxF than the wild type. Judging from
the diﬀerence in ﬁnal 1sbnCF cell yield between 0 and 30 µM
LaCl3, 1sbnCF has methanol oxidation capacity in the presence
of LaCl3, which means that La3+ uptake occurs by an unknown
mechanism to activate XoxF. The reason for the high activity of
PxoxF is unclear, but it is possible that sbn siderophore is involved
in the maintenance of La3+ concentration in the cells, and the
resultant high La3+ content in the cells resulted in high induction
of xoxF.
Role of Sbn Siderophore in Bioﬁlm
Formation, Resistance to Reactive
Oxygen Species, and Heavy Metals
The bioﬁlm formation was inversely proportional to the medium
iron concentration in the wild type, whereas supplementation
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 5

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
FIGURE 3 | (A) Growth of duckweed plants in liquid 1/2 MS medium inoculated with none (non-inoculated control, NIC), strain 22A wild type (WT), and 1sbnCF,
under 10 and 1 mg/l FeSO4 for 28 days. Representative pictures are shown for each treatment. (B) Dry weight of plants after cultivation. (C) Iron content in the plants
and bacterial cells. (D) Bacterial mass measured as wet weight after cultivation. All the data are reported as the mean of three replicates ± standard deviation (SD).
with iron citrate resulted in bioﬁlm formation in a concentrationdependent manner in 1sbnCF (Supplementary Figure 4A).
This result suggests that iron availability and siderophore
production can inﬂuence bioﬁlm formation in strain 22A. We
could not compare bioﬁlm formation without iron citrate since
1sbnCF could not grow.
1sbnCF was more susceptible to hydrogen peroxide (1 mM)
and sodium nitrite (10 mM) but not to diamide (10 mM)
compared to the wild type (Supplementary Figure 4B),
suggesting that siderophore synthesis is involved in resistance to
the oxidative stress.
The growth of strain 22A and 1sbnCF in the presence
of 50 µM iron citrate was not aﬀected by 10 µM ZnSO4,
CuSO4, NiSO4, and MnSO4 (data not shown). The growth
of 1sbnCF was inhibited by 100 µM ZnSO4, CuSO4, and
NiSO4, but no signiﬁcant inhibition was seen on the wild-type
strain (Figure 5A). Supplementation of wild-type spent media
to 1sbnCF restored its growth under heavy metals. Higher iron
concentration (100 µM iron citrate) also alleviated heavy metal
toxicity in 1sbnCF. sbnA promoter activity in the wild type
under 100 µM of each heavy metal and two iron concentration
regimes was examined (Figure 5B). PsbnA showed a control-level
activity under ZnSO4 and NiSO4, and repressed activity under
CuSO4 and MnSO4 in the presence of 5 µM FeSO4. In the
presence of 100 µM FeSO4, the promoter activity was generally
repressed even in the presence of these metals, but not completely
repressed in the presence of ZnSO4. The heavy metal content
measurement revealed higher Zn accumulation and lower Ni
accumulation in ZnSO4- and NiSO4-treated 1sbnCF compared
to the wild type, respectively (Figure 5C). The cellular iron
content in the absence of heavy metals was comparable between
22A wild type and 1sbnCF when they were grown in the
presence of iron citrate (Figure 5D). The addition of ZnSO4 or
CuSO4 reduced, whereas the addition of MnSO4 increased, iron
accumulation in both strains. The addition of NiSO4 resulted
in iron accumulation that was similar to that of the control in
both the wild type and 1sbnCF. Overall, these data suggested
that sbn siderophore is involved in the heavy metal resistance of
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 6

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
FIGURE 4 | (A) Solubilization of La2O3 by the spent media (SM) of the wild-type strain 22A (WT) and 1sbnCF, and non-inoculated medium control. (B) Solubilization
of La2O3 by citrate (5–500 µM). (C) PsbnA activity in 1mxaF in the presence of varied concentrations of LaCl3 under 5 and 50 µM FeSO4. (D) Growth of the WT,
1mxaF, 1sbnCF, and 1mxaF1sbnCF on methanol in the presence of 100 µM FeSO4, 100 µM iron citrate, 9 mg/l La2O3, and 30 µM LaCl3, and their mixtures.
(E) Growth of the same set of mutants on methanol in the presence/absence of the spent medium of the WT, under 100 µM FeSO4 and 30 µM LaCl3. (F) Growth of
the same set of mutants on methanol in the presence of different concentrations of citrate, under 50 µM FeSO4 and 30 µM LaCl3. (G) PmxaF and PxoxF activity in WT
and 1sbnCF grown on methanol plus succinate in the absence/presence of 30 µM LaCl3. All data represent the mean of three replicates ± standard deviation (SD).
strain 22A; however, the mechanism of resistance for each metal
may diﬀer.
Variety of Siderophore Biosynthesis
Clusters in Methylobacterium Species
We found a total of 66 siderophore synthesis gene clusters
among 60 genomes of Methylobacterium type strains and strain
22A through anti-SMASH analysis (Supplementary Table 2).
They had varied homology to known siderophore gene clusters
(7–100%) and could be classiﬁed into 10 groups based on
similarity. A total of 13 species were associated with two or
more siderophore synthesis clusters. Most of the siderophore
biosynthesis gene clusters were composed of 6–16 genes (data
not shown). We found that 41 type strains were positive in
the CAS agar assay. Although no gene cluster was identiﬁed in
nine strains, seven of them were positive in the CAS agar assay.
The malleobactin-like siderophore gene cluster was dominantly
found in clades A, A1, and A5. The taiwachelin-like siderophore
gene cluster was found in clade A4 and some members in clade B.
Clades B2, C1, and C2 members have no dominant siderophore
gene cluster, and only three species have a staphylobactin-like
siderophore gene cluster in clade C1, to which M. aquaticum
belongs. A total of 15 other siderophore gene clusters had
no similarity to known clusters. Thus, siderophore synthesis
is a common characteristic among Methylobacterium species,
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 7

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
FIGURE 5 | (A) Growth of the wild-type strain 22A and 1sbnCF on succinate in the presence of 100 µM of ZnSO4, CuSO4, NiSO4, and MnSO4 under 50 µM iron
citrate, growth of 1sbnCF under 50 µM under 100 µM iron citrate. Growth of 1sbnCF on succinate in the presence of 100 µM heavy metals under 50 µM iron
citrate supplemented with 22A wild-type spent media. (B) PsbnA activity in the wild-type strain 22A in the presence of 100 µM of each heavy metal under 5 and
100 µM FeSO4. (C) Heavy metal accumulation in the wild-type strain 22A and 1sbnCF cells supplemented with 25 µM heavy metals (HM) or without (NT). (D) Iron
accumulation in the cells of wild-type strain 22A and 1sbnCF grown on succinate in the presence of 25 µM of ZnSO4, CuSO4, NiSO4, and MnSO4, under 100 µM
iron citrate. Data represent the mean of three replicates ± standard deviation (SD).
although only some types of siderophore are distinctly conserved
in phylogenetic clades.
Co-inoculation of 58 Methylobacterium type strains with
strain 22A 1sbnCF resulted in growth restoration by 21
strains. Many of the positive strains have taiwachelin (8
strains) or staphylobactin (6 strains), whereas strains containing
malleobactin or ochrobactin were negative. Interestingly, only
62% of the strains with taiwachelin-like siderophore could enable
iron deﬁciency recovery. All ﬁve strains with an sbn cluster
could complement the growth of 1sbnCF. R. solanacearum strain
RS1000, which produces staphyloferrin B (Bhatt and Denny,
2004), was also able to rescue 1sbnCF. The strains with an sbn
cluster were all isolated from plants except for M. ajmalii strain
IF7SW-B2T (Bijlani et al., 2021), implying the possible advantage
of this type of siderophore in the plant-associated lifestyle.
Characterization of TonB-Dependent
Receptors in Strain 22A
The strain 22A genome encodes 12 TBDRs, among which, those
for iron-siderophore complex, iron citrate, and possible Lnlanthanophore should exist. We examined the phenotype of the
gene disruption mutants or deletion mutants of these receptors in
strain 22A. The 9 TBDR mutants not discussed here did not show
any phenotypes in these assays.
TonB-dependent receptor for sbn siderophore: A TBDR gene
(Maq22A_c25420) was found in the upstream region of the sbn
gene cluster and named tonB_sbn. 1tonB_sbn showed slower
growth with FeSO4, and 1sbnCF1tonB_sbn could not grow on
succinate with FeSO4 and wild-type spent medium (Figure 6A).
Iron citrate supplementation rescued 1sbnCF1tonB_sbn growth
(Figure 6B). These results indicated that tonB_sbn is involved in
the sbn-siderophore-iron complex transport.
TonB-dependent receptor for iron citrate: We found that
a gene deletion mutant of Maq22A_c24885, herein named
1tonB_cit, under a background of 1sbnCF, showed a lag
phase when grown on succinate with iron citrate (Figure 6B).
Supplementation of 50 µM citrate and 50 µM FeSO4 also resulted
in a lag phase (Figure 6C). tonB_cit is therefore involved in iron
citrate transport. However, the mutant could still grow. There
may thus be another TBDR that can transport iron citrate or one
for iron chelated by other substances.
TonB-dependent receptor for Ln: A deletion mutant of
Maq22A_c14845 (labeled as 1tonB_Ln) under a 1mxaF
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 8

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
FIGURE 6 | (A) Growth of the mutants of each TBDR gene generated under the wild-type strain 22A (WT) and 1SbnCF backgrounds on succinate supplemented
with 100 µM FeSO4 10% WT spent medium (SM), respectively. (B) Growth of the mutants of each TBDR gene generated under the background of 1sbnCF on
succinate under 100 µM iron citrate. (C) Same experiment as (B) but with 50 µM citric acid and 50 µM FeSO4. (D) Growth of the mutants of each TBDR gene
generated under the 1mxaF background on methanol under 100 µM iron citrate and 30 µM LaCl3. (E) PtonB_Ln activity in WT grown on methanol in the presence of
different concentrations of LaCl3. The gene disruption mutants were grown in the presence of kanamycin throughout the experiment. All data represent the mean of
three replicates ± standard deviation (SD).
background did not grow on methanol with LaCl3 (Figure 6D).
The promoter region of tonB_Ln was cloned into pAT06, and
the promoter activity in the wild type showed lower expression
in a higher LaCl3 concentration (Figure 6E). This suggests
that tonB_Ln is involved in Ln transport, and its expression is
repressed when Ln is well available.
Variety and Distribution of
TonB-Dependent Receptors in
Methylobacterium Genomes
Using the sequences of the TBDRs in strain 22A and the TBDRs
found in M. extorquens strain AM1 (LutH, META1p1785,
and
TonB_Lcc,
META1p4129)
as
queries,
we
searched
TBDRs encoded in all type strains of Methylobacterium and
Methylorubrum species (Figure 7 and Supplementary Table 3).
TBDRs found in the genera were phylogenetically classiﬁed into
25 clusters, and each strain had 7–23 TBDRs in its genome.
TonB_sbn is homologous to TonB_Lcc of strain AM1 and 52
other TBDRs. TonB_Ln is phylogenetically close to strain AM1
LutH and widely conserved with a total of 69 homologs in
the genera; it is especially enriched in clades A4 and C1. LutH
has only 10 homologs and is well conserved only in clade B
(Methylorubrum species) and two clade A1 members. TonB_cit
was also well conserved (40 homologous TBDRs), suggesting that
the majority of Methylobacterium species can utilize iron citrate.
TBDRs in strain 22A are phylogenetically diverse and each of
them is widely conserved among Methylobacterium species.
DISCUSSION
The strain 22A sbn gene cluster showed 33–56% homology to
sbn genes in S. aureus (Supplementary Table 1). The cluster
lacks sbnI, whereas sbnE and sbnF are fused in strain 22A. We
presumed that strain 22A siderophore has a similar structure to
staphyloferrin B. 1sbnA, 1sbnD, 1sbnF, 1sbnH, and 1sbnCF
but not 1sbnC showed defective growth on succinate under
iron deﬁciency. Because SbnC catalyzes the critical ﬁnal step for
staphyloferrin B synthesis, the intermediate(s) produced without
SbnC may still be active for iron chelation. SbnF in strain 22A
(the fused SbnE and SbnF) may be more important to synthesize
the intermediates. This point will be clariﬁed when we determine
the siderophore structure and the functions of each gene.
1sbnCF could not grow well with FeSO4 (Figure 1A), and
its growth was complemented by the spent medium of the
wild type or iron citrate (Figures 1B,C). sbn gene expression is
induced by low iron availability and repressed by iron citrate
(Figure 2). Citrate has a lower aﬃnity (Kd < 0.260 nM) for iron
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 9

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
FIGURE 7 | Phylogenetic tree and gene counts of TBDRs found in the genomes of different subclades of Methylobacterium type strains. The phylogenetic tree is
constructed based on the amino acid sequences of TBDR genes. The Methylobacterium subclade deﬁnition is based on our previous report (Alessa et al., 2021).
A total of 25 clades are labeled A-Y. The counts of TBDRs and description of characterized TBDRs are indicated in brackets. Details are presented in
Supplementary Table 3.
than that of conventional siderophores (Fukushima et al., 2012)
and acts as a general iron chelator for the bacterial community
as opposed to individual siderophores (Mazoy et al., 1997).
Therefore, strain 22A preferably utilizes iron citrate if available,
without synthesizing sbn siderophore.
The sbn siderophore of strain 22A is one of the plant
growth promotion factors (Figure 3). Bacterial siderophore
supplementation abolishes iron deﬁciency in plants (Crowley
et al., 1992). Interestingly, 1sbnCF competed with plants for iron,
which resulted in a low plant iron uptake. Because strain 22A
can also utilize citrate as a carbon source, and citrate is one of
the common organic acids in root exudates in response to iron
deﬁciency (Ling et al., 2011; Yuan et al., 2015), we considered that
1sbnCF overtook the iron complexed by plant-derived citrate.
It should be noted that since iron citrate represses siderophore
production, siderophore synthesis in the wild type precedes the
plant citrate exudation, and the wild-type strain 22A did not
become opportunistic. The growth promotion ability of strain
22A was also observed in A. thaliana in low iron conditions
(Supplementary Figure 3). The siderophore was not essential
for strain 22A to colonize the A. thaliana phyllosphere, but in
return, the plant growth was repressed. Judging from its iron
accumulation, 1sbnCF can pirate iron citrate that is relatively
abundant in the phyllosphere (Yokosho et al., 2009; RellánÁlvarez et al., 2010). On the other hand, siderophore synthesis
was a biological cost in the wild type.
We found that the sbn siderophore and citrate solubilize
La2O3 (Figures 4A,B). The sbn siderophore was indispensable in
the absence of citrate (Figures 4D,E) but was dispensable in the
presence of citrate (not iron citrate) for XoxF- and Ln-dependent
methylotrophic growth (Figure 4F). Thus, we concluded that
the sbn siderophore is another type of “lanthanophore” involved
in Ln uptake, in addition to the aerobactin-type siderophore in
M. extorquens strain AM1 (Zytnick et al., 2022). Interestingly,
sbn siderophore inactivation resulted in the overactivation of
PxoxF in the presence of LaCl3 (Figure 4G). The expression of
xoxF and mxaF is regulated by the Ln-switch; therefore, this xoxF
overexpression indeed suppressed mxaF. It is generally accepted
that siderophores play a role in the homeostasis of other metals
other than iron. Most probably, the sbn siderophore plays a role
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 10

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
not only in controlled Ln uptake but also in maintaining cellular
Ln homeostasis. The siderophore-free La3+ in the periplasm
might strongly induce XoxF through activation of MxbDM
that is a two-component signaling system responsible for the
expression of MDHs (Yanpirat et al., 2020). The exact reason
for this high xoxF induction remains to be determined through
investigation of the Ln-switch; however, here, we can add the sbntype lanthanophore as one of the factors involved in the complex
switching mechanism.
Iron concentration inversely impacted the bioﬁlm formation
in strain 22A wild type. Access to a suﬃcient amount of
iron could deter bioﬁlm formation since environmental stresses
such as iron starvation generally trigger bioﬁlm formation
(Muhammad et al., 2020). This corroborated with other studies
showing that iron depletion enhanced bioﬁlm formation in
diﬀerent bacteria including E. coli (Hancock et al., 2008)
and Cupriavidus necator (Li et al., 2019). In contrast, bioﬁlm
formation in 1sbnCF was enhanced with an increasing iron
concentration (Supplementary Figure 4A). Iron is essential for
bioﬁlm formation (Oliveira et al., 2017) and iron is a limiting
growth factor for 1sbnCF at the tested iron citrate concentrations
(Supplementary Figure 4A). The enhanced bioﬁlm formation
in 1sbnCF by iron citrate suggested that iron acquisition rather
than sbn siderophore per se was the important determinant.
1sbnCF showed less tolerance to hydrogen peroxide and
sodium nitrite (Supplementary Figure 4B), implying that this
iron uptake system confers tolerance to oxidative stress. Iron
is a dangerous metal due to its capacity to generate reactive
oxygen species (ROS) through the Fenton reaction (Corpas
et al., 2015). Therefore, iron homeostasis could be related to
oxidative stress (Cornelis et al., 2011). SirA, a staphyloferrin
B transport system, inﬂuences tolerance to ROS in S. aureus
(Nobre and Saraiva, 2014). Whereas hydrogen peroxide increases
intracellular hydroxyl radicals that lead to direct oxidation,
diamide causes indirect oxidative stress by oxidizing glutathione
(GSH) and furthering redox imbalance (Toledano et al., 2003).
Therefore, iron mitigation by sbn siderophore could be ineﬀective
for such an indirect oxidative stress mechanism.
The sbn siderophore of strain 22A contributes to heavy metal
resistance, and the results of the cellular metal accumulation and
PsbnA activity analyses indicated that toxicity and siderophoremediated resistance mechanisms diﬀer depending on the metal
species (Figure 5). The heavy metal toxicity was also inﬂuenced
by the iron concentration. This suggested possibility of uptake
competition among the metals. ZnSO4 treatment did not have an
eﬀect on PsbnA activity, caused a high accumulation of Zn2+ in
1sbnCF, and caused iron scarcity. The scarcity suggested that the
sbn siderophore binds Zn2+, and hence, the siderophore prevents
uncontrolled entry of Zn2+ into the cells (Braud et al., 2009).
CuSO4 treatment repressed PsbnA activity, caused unchanged
Cu2+ accumulation in the wild type and 1sbnCF, and decreased
iron content in the wild type. Therefore, copper susceptibility of
the mutant may include iron scarcity caused by PsbnA repression
but not Cu2+ accumulation. NiSO4 treatment did not have an
eﬀect on PsbnA activity and caused a higher accumulation of Ni2+
in the wild type. Thus, Ni susceptibility of the mutant was not
caused by Ni accumulation but rather by repressed iron transport
that is necessary to overcome Ni toxicity. MnSO4 treatment at
the tested concentration did not cause any growth inhibition in
the wild type and 1sbnCF, suggesting that the sbn siderophore
does not take part in the resistance. However, it caused decreased
PsbnA activity, higher Mn, and iron accumulation in both cells.
This contradictory decreased PsbnA activity and higher iron
accumulation could not be explained well only with these
data. These metals are essential mineral elements that exhibit
important interactions and possible competitive inhibition of
transport. The biochemical resistance mechanism in which the
sbn siderophore participates awaits further characterization of
the puriﬁed siderophore including its binding capacity and
identiﬁcation of the transporters for each metal.
Siderophore production is a common characteristic in
Methylobacterium
species
bearing
similarity
and
disparity
among groups of individual strains (Supplementary Table 2).
Malleobactin- and taiwachelin-type siderophore gene clusters
may have been conserved through their evolution and phylogeny
whereas the horizontal acquisition of the other siderophore gene
clusters is dependent on their habitat as opposed to species
evolution. Other strains of Methylobacterium species, as well
as R. solanacearum with sbn genes and many taiwachelincontaining strains, were able to rescue 1sbnCF from iron
starvation. Thus, strain 22A can utilize these xenosiderophores
from Methylobacterium species and other non-methylotrophic
bacteria. The diﬀerent types of siderophores and inter-species
utilization among Methylobacterium species may contribute to
the speciﬁc species predominance of the genus or even to
shape the microbial community in diﬀerent niches, especially
when Methylobacterium comprises one of the most predominant
species in an environment, such as the phyllosphere.
Among 12 TBDRs in strain 22A, here, we identiﬁed two
TBDRs for iron uptake (Figure 6), which may enable the
strain to more eﬃciently acquire either siderophore-bound or
citrate-bound iron. The tonB_sbn is used for the uptake of sbn
siderophore. On the other hand, tonB_cit is more eﬃcient in iron
citrate uptake; however, another TBDR for iron citrate has not
yet been identiﬁed. The tonB_Ln is necessary for Ln-dependent
methylotrophy (Figure 6D). The expression of tonB_Ln was
repressed with increased Ln concentration (Figure 6E). It
remains unknown what form of Ln3+ is the substrate for
tonB_Ln (sbn siderophore-bound Ln3+ or citrate-Ln3+) and
whether tonB_sbn incorporates sbn siderophore-bound Ln3+
or not. The Ln3+
concentration-dependent repression of
tonB_Ln, which was also found in tonB_LutH in strain AM1
(Roszczenko-Jasi´nska et al., 2020), suggested that they have
an Ln3+-sensing mechanism to optimize Ln3+ uptake through
TBDR regulation.
TonB_sbn, which is homologous to tonB_Lcc in strain
AM1, was widely conserved among Methylobacterium species
(Figure 7). The tonB_Ln and tonB_cit were also well conserved.
Interestingly, tonB_LutH in strain AM1 was less conserved and
found only in clade B (Methylorubrum species). The distribution
of common or clade speciﬁc TBDRs may suggest the possibility
of chelator sharing or competition among the Methylobacterium
species. Other non-characterized TBDRs of strain 22A also
showed a wide range of conservation within Methylobacterium
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 11

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
species; therefore, future exploration of their metal speciﬁcity and
ionophore will be intriguing.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Microbial Strains and Culture Conditions
The Methylobacterium species used in this study were grown and
maintained on an R2A medium or mineral medium containing
either 0.5% methanol or 0.5% succinate (herein referred to as
methanol and succinate media), as previously described (Alessa
et al., 2021). Kanamycin (25 mg/l), rifampicin (20 mg/l), LaCl3
(30 µM), La2O3 (9 mg/l), FeSO4 (5–100 µM), and iron citrate (5
or 100 µM) were added when necessary.
The growth tests were conducted in 200 µl various medium
prepared in 96-well plates, rotary-shaken at 300 rpm at 28◦C.
The strains grown on R2A solid media supplemented with iron
citrate were harvested by centrifugation and washed with 0.9%
NaCl solution to make a cell suspension (OD600 = 1.0). The cell
suspension was inoculated to a ﬁnal OD value of 0.02 in the test
media condition. Growth was monitored by measuring OD600
using a microplate reader (PowerScan HT, Sumitomo Dainippon
Pharma, Osaka, Japan).
The wild type strain 22A was grown in methanol media
supplemented with 5 µM FeSO4 for 5 days. The cells were
precipitated at 10,000 × g for 10 min and the supernatant was
ﬁltered using a 0.2-µm membrane ﬁlter. The spent media was
stored at –20◦C until use. The target strains were grown on 10%
wild-type spent media in the appropriate media.
Detection of Siderophore
Siderophore synthesis was assessed by chrome azurol S (CAS)
agar assay for all the strains grown in modiﬁed succinate media.
In brief, succinate media without Fe3+ was mixed with CAS as
previously described (Louden et al., 2011). Diﬀerent methods
were used to assess the types of siderophores. Arnow assay
for catechol-type (Arnow, 1937): 50 µl of culture supernatant,
50 µl of 0.5 M HCl, and 10 µl reagent (1 g/ml NaNO2 and
1 g/ml Na2MoO4·2H2O) were mixed. After the formation of
the yellow color, 90 µl of 0.1 M NaOH was added, resulting in
the generation of red color. 1,2-dihydroxybenzene was used as a
standard. Atkin assay for hydroxamate-type (Atkin et al., 1970):
50 µl of culture supernatant was added to 50 µl of the Atkin
reagent [0.177 g of Fe(ClO4)3 and 1.43 g HClO4 in 100 ml water].
After 5 min at room temperature, the appearance of a winered color indicated the presence of hydroxamate siderophore.
Salicylhydroxamic acid was used as a standard. Vogel test for
hydroxycarboxylate (Vogel, 1957): the reagent was made by
adding 20 µl of phenolphthalein to 60 µl of 1 M NaOH and
topping up to 1 ml with water. In total, 50 µl of culture
supernatant was mixed with 50 µl of reagent. The disappearance
of color by the addition of culture supernatant indicated the
presence of hydroxycarboxylate siderophore.
Construction of Mutant Strains
The
primers
used
in
this
study
are
listed
in
Supplementary
Table
4.
We
generated
gene
deletion
mutants of strain 22A siderophore synthesis gene cluster,
1sbnC
(Maq22A_c25435),
1sbnF
(Maq22A_c25445),
and
1sbnCF. Similarly, TBDR gene deletion mutants, tonB_cit
(Maq22A_c24885) and tonB_Ln (Maq22A_c14845), were also
generated in this study. These gene deletion mutants were
generated using the allele-replacement vector pK18mobSacB,
as previously described. Gene disruption mutants of other sbn
genes (sbnA, sbnB, sbnD, sbnG, sbnH, and Maq22A_c25465) and
TBDR genes (tonB_sbn (Maq22A_c25420), Maq22A_c06025,
Maq22A_c08030,
Maq22A_c21870,
Maq22A_c22745,
Maq22A_c22905,
Maq22A_c27600,
Maq22A_1p31685,
Maq22A_1p34825, and Maq22A_1p38180) were also generated
using pK18mobSacB. In brief, the approximately 600 bp midportion of the target gene was polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-ampliﬁed and cloned into the EcoRI site on the
pK18mobSacB
vector.
The
vectors
were
introduced
into
strain 22A via conjugation using Escherichia coli S17-1, and
the kanamycin-resistant mutants were regarded as the gene
disruption mutants. 1mxaF was generated in our previous study
(Masuda et al., 2018).
Construction of Promoter-Reporter
Vector
We developed pCM130KmC for general cloning purposes that
operates in strain 22A from pCM130 (Addgene plasmid #45828,
Marx and Lidstrom, 2001) in our previous study (Yanpirat et al.,
2020). A fragment containing an EcoRI site and His-tag coding
sequence generated by a pair of complementary oligonucleotides
(pCM130KmCinsert1 and 2, Supplementary Table 3) was
inserted into the EcoRI site of pCM130KmC with an In-Fusion
Cloning kit to generate pAT01. Next, we also introduced bacterial
luciferase (Lux) genes that are PCR-ampliﬁed from pUC18-miniTn7T-Gm-lux (Wehrmann et al., 2017) with LuxC-F and LuxER2 primers into pAT01 to construct a luciferase-reporter vector
(pAT06-Lux). The PCR-generated promoter regions of sbnA,
tonB_Ln, xoxF, and mxaF were cloned into the NcoI site on the
pAT06-Lux vector. The vectors were introduced into strain 22A
via conjugation using E. coli S17-1 and selected on kanamycin.
To assess the promoter activity, cells of strain 22A and
its derivatives transformed with pAT06-Lux containing an
appropriate promoter were maintained on R2A supplemented
with 25 mg/l Km. The cells were collected, washed with
0.9% NaCl solution, and inoculated into appropriate media
(succinate or methanol or methanol/succinate medium) at a
ﬁnal concentration of OD600 = 0.02. The culture was replicated
in white 96-well plates (for luminescence measurement) and
transparent 96-well plates for bacteria growth assessment. The
growth conditions were maintained as mentioned above. The
maximum luminescence was normalized to cell density (OD600)
and reported as promoter activity.
The Physiological Role of the Strain 22A
Siderophore
Methylobacterium strains grown in R2A were used for the
phenotyping assays.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 12

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
(1) Lanthanum uptake. Strain 22A wild type and 1sbnCF
were grown on succinate-methanol media for 5 days, and their
spent media was ﬁltered using a 0.2-µm membrane ﬁlter. The
spent media or varied concentrations of citrate were incubated
with La2O3 18 mg/l for 24 h at 28◦C under shaking at 300 rpm.
The sample was centrifuged (10,000 × g, 4 min, at 25◦C) to
remove La2O3, and 300 µl of the supernatant was dried at 80◦C
overnight. The dry weight was measured, and the pellets were
resuspended in 70% HNO3 and boiled at 100◦C for 1 h. Samples
were diluted to a ﬁnal concentration of 5% HNO3 and analyzed
by ICP-MS (Agilent 7500cx). Strain 22A wild type, 1sbnCF,
and 1mxaF1sbnCF were grown in 200 µl methanol medium
containing La2O3/LaCl3 and iron citrate in 96-well plates. The
plates were shaken at 28◦C at 300 rpm and the cell growth was
monitored (OD600) using a microplate reader.
(2) Oxidative and nitrosative stress resistance. Strain 22A
wild type and 1sbnCF were inoculated in liquid R2A media
containing 1 mM hydrogen peroxide, 10 mM sodium nitrite, or
10 mM diamide and were incubated at 28◦C with continuous
shaking at 300 rpm for 24 h in liquid R2A media. The samples
were serial diluted and spread on solid R2A media containing
100 µM iron citrate for 48 h. The colony-forming units (CFUs)
per milliliter were evaluated, and the percentage of survival in
comparison with the unchallenged treatment was calculated.
(3) Heavy metal tolerance. Strain 22A wild type and 1sbnCF
were grown in succinate media containing 100 µM of each
heavy metal in 96-well plates and their growth was monitored
by measuring OD600. For cellular metal content quantiﬁcation,
they were grown on succinate in the presence of 25 µM
of ZnSO4, CuSO4, NiSO4, and MnSO4 for 5 days. The cells
were harvested and washed three times with phosphate-buﬀered
saline (PBS) containing 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA) and then six times with PBS. Bacterial pellets were
desiccated at 100◦C overnight. Thereafter, the samples were
digested and analyzed with the ICP-MS as described above.
Iron concentration-dependent heavy metal toxicity was also
determined by culturing strain 22A and 1sbnCF in a varied
concentration of iron and the heavy metals (50–100 µM).
(4) Bioﬁlm assay. Bioﬁlm formation was studied by a modiﬁed
method by O’Toole (2011). Strain 22A wild type and 1sbnCF
were cultured in succinate media containing 25 to 100 µM
FeSO4 and iron citrate prepared in 96-well plates at 28◦C for
96 h. The content of each well was removed by decantation.
The wells were then washed three times with PBS (pH 7.3),
air-dried for 45 min, and stained with 0.1% w/v crystal violet
solution (200 µl) for 10 min. After three times washing with
water, 200 µl of 95% ethanol was added, and the absorbance was
determined at 595 nm.
Interaction of Strain 22A and Plants
(1) Plant growth promotion by strain 22A: Single sterilized
duckweed frond was grown in liquid (5 ml) half-strength
Murashige and Skoog medium (1/2 MS) under a modiﬁed FeSO4
concentration of 1 or 10 mg/l. The plants were subjected to
inoculation of strain 22A wild type and 1sbnCF at a ﬁnal
concentration of OD600 = 0.01 under aseptic conditions. Surface
sterilized A. thaliana Col-0 seeds were grown on solid 1/2 MS
and inoculated with the bacteria as described above. The plants
were grown at 23◦C with a photoperiod of 16/8 h (light/dark).
The experiments were conducted in triplicate. After 28 days, the
plants were transferred into separate 1.5-ml tubes and bacterial
cells in the media were pelleted at 4,000 × g for 4 min. The plant
and bacterial cell fresh weight, dry weight, and metal contents
were determined.
(2) In planta colonization assay: A rifampicin-resistant
spontaneous
mutant
of
strain
22A
(strain
22A-rif)
and
kanamycin-resistant 1sbnCF (1sbnCF-km) were generated as
previously described (Alamgir et al., 2015). A. thaliana seeds were
inoculated with the 5 µl (OD600 = 0.01) of the two strains singly
or in combination and grown as described previously. A total of
four seedlings were used for each experiment and replicated three
times. Then, 5–10 leaves of A. thaliana plants not touching the
media (200–300 mg fresh weight) were washed in 1.5-ml sterile
tubes containing 1 ml 0.9% NaCl. Bacteria were dislodged from
the leaf by shaking (5,000 rpm, 10 min) and sonication (34%
amplitude, 20 s, Vibra cell, Sonics and Materials Inc.) followed by
vortexing for 30 s. The resulting suspensions were serially diluted
and plated onto R2A containing rifampicin or kanamycin for
CFU determination.
Characterization of TonB-Dependent
Receptor in Strain 22A
A total of 12 TBDRs in strain 22A were assessed for their
role in iron-sbn siderophore uptake in 96-well plates. The
mutant strains of the 12 TBDR in wild-type backgrounds were
grown in succinate media supplemented with 100 µM FeSO4.
Similarly, the mutants generated under 1sbnCF background
were cultivated in succinate media supplemented with 50 µM
FeSO4 and 10% wild-type spent media, or 100 µM iron citrate,
or 50 µM FeSO4 and 50 µM citrate. The mutant strains of the 12
TBDR with a background of 1mxaF were also generated to assess
the TBDR for Ln uptake.
Analysis of Siderophore Biosynthesis
Clusters and TonB-Dependent Receptors
in Methylobacterium Species
A search for secondary metabolite biosynthesis genes was
performed for the 60 Methylobacterium species genome to
predict the siderophore gene cluster using AntiSMASH software
(version 6.0.1 https://antismash.secondarymetabolites.org) (Blin
et al., 2019). Local BLASTp using the siderophore cluster and
TBDR genes characterized in strain 22A and (META1p1785
and META1p4129) in strain AM1 as queries was run against
the non-redundant protein database of 59 Methylobacterium
and
Methylorubrum
type
strains
at
threshold
values
set
at ≥30% identity.
Siderophore Cross-Feeding
1sbnCF cell suspension (OD600 = 0.01) in 0.75% agar was
overlaid on solid succinate media. A sterilized paper disk (6 mm
diameter) was placed on the plate, and the test siderophore donor
strains were inoculated onto it. Colony formation of 1sbnCF
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 13

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
around the paper disk was checked after 8 days of incubation
at 28◦C.
Data Analysis
The statistical analysis (one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s
test or Student’s t-test) of data was carried out using Prism 6
(GraphPad Software, Inc., CA, United States). Only p-values less
than a 5% level of signiﬁcance are shown in the ﬁgures.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in this study are included
in the article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PJ and YF performed the experiments. PJ, OA, and AT performed
the data analysis and drafted the manuscript. All authors
designed the research and reviewed the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science KAKENHI grants (18H02129 and 21H02105 to AT),
Advanced Low Carbon Technology Research and Development
Program (ALCA) JST, Ohara Foundation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Y. Tsuchiya and S. Rikiishi (IPSR, Okayama
University) for ICP-MS analysis, T. Mukaihara for providing
R. solanacearum, and Y. Utsumi for experimental assistance.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.
2022.921635/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Adler, C., Corbalán, N. S., Seyedsayamdost, M. R., Pomares, M. F., de Cristóbal,
R. E., Clardy, J., et al. (2012). Catecholate siderophores protect bacteria from
pyochelin toxicity. PLoS One 7:e46754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046754
Ahmed, E., and Holmström, S. J. M. (2014). Siderophores in environmental
research: roles and applications. Microb. Biotechnol. 7, 196–208. doi: 10.1111/
1751-7915.12117
Alamgir, K. M., Masuda, S., Fujitani, Y., Fukuda, F., and Tani, A. (2015). Production
of ergothioneine by Methylobacterium species. Front. Microbiol. 6:1185. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2015.01185
Alessa, O., Ogura, Y., Fujitani, Y., Takami, H., Hayashi, T., Sahin, N., et al. (2021).
Comprehensive comparative genomics and phenotyping of Methylobacterium
species. Front. Microbiol. 12:740610. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.740610
Anthony, C. (2004). The quinoprotein dehydrogenases for methanol and glucose.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 428, 2–9. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.03.038
Arnow, L. E. (1937). Colorimetric determination of the components of 3, 4dihydroxyphenylalanine-tyrosine mixtures. J. Biol. Chem. 118, 531–537.
Atkin, C. L., Neilands, J. B., and Phaﬀ, H. J. (1970). Rhodotorulic acid from
species of Leucosporidium, Rhodosporidium, Rhodotorula, Sporidiobolus, and
Sporobolomyces, and a new alanine-containing ferrichrome from Cryptococcus
melibiosum.
J.
Bacteriol.
103,
722–733.
doi:
10.1128/jb.103.3.722-733.
1970
Bhatt, G., and Denny, T. P. (2004). Ralstonia solanacearum iron scavenging by
the siderophore staphyloferrin B is controlled by PhcA, the global virulence
regulator. J. Bacteriol. 186, 7896–7904. doi: 10.1128/JB.186.23.7896-7904.2004
Bijlani, S., Singh, N. K., Eedara, V. V. R., Podile, A. R., Mason, C. E., Wang, C. C. C.,
et al. (2021). Methylobacterium ajmalii sp. nov., isolated from the international
space station. Front. Microbiol. 12:639396. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.639396
Blin, K., Shaw, S., Kloosterman, A. M., Charlop-Powers, Z., van Wezel, G. P.,
Medema, M. H., et al. (2019). antiSMASH 6.0: improving cluster detection and
comparison capabilities. Nucleic Acids Res. 49. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab335
Braud, A., Hannauer, M., Mislin, G. L. A., and Schalk, I. J. (2009). The Pseudomonas
aeruginosa pyochelin-iron uptake pathway and its metal speciﬁcity. J. Bacteriol.
191, 3517–3525. doi: 10.1128/JB.00010-09
Braun, V., Pramanik, A., Gwinner, T., Köberle, M., and Bohn, E. (2009).
Sideromycins: tools and antibiotics. Biometals 22, 3–13.
Brown, P. H., Csiro, D., Graham, R. D., Agricultural, W., and Osmond, G. (1990).
“Rare earth elements in biological systems,” in Handbook on the Physics and
Chemistry of Rare Earths, eds J. R. Kag and L. Eyring (Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publisher), 423–452.
Challis, G. L. (2005). A widely distributed bacterial pathway for siderophore
biosynthesis independent of nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chembiochem
6, 601–611. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200400283
Chaturvedi, K. S., Hung, C. S., Crowley, J. R., Stapleton, A. E., and Henderson,
J. P. (2012). The siderophore yersiniabactin binds copper to protect pathogens
during infection. Nat. Chem. Biol. 8, 731–736. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1020
Cheung, J., Beasley, F. C., Liu, S., Lajoie, G. A., and Heinrichs, D. E. (2009).
Molecular characterization of staphyloferrin B biosynthesis in Staphylococcus
aureus. Mol. Microbiol. 74, 594–608. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2009.06880.x
Cornelis, P., Wei, Q., Andrews, S. C., and Vinckx, T. (2011). Iron homeostasis and
management of oxidative stress response in bacteria. Metallomics 3, 540–549.
doi: 10.1039/c1mt00022e
Corpas, F. J., Gupta, D. K., and Palma, J. M. (2015). “Production sites of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) in organelles from plant cells BT,” in Reactive Oxygen
Species and Oxidative Damage in Plants Under Stress, eds D. K. Gupta, J. M.
Palma, and F. J. Corpas (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 1–22.
Crowley, D. E., Römheld, V., Marschner, H., and Szaniszlo, P. J. (1992).
Root-microbial
eﬀects
on
plant
iron
uptake
from
siderophores
and
phytosiderophores. Plant Soil 142, 1–7. doi: 10.1007/BF00010169
Dale, S. E., Doherty-Kirby, A., Lajoie, G., and Heinrichs, D. E. (2004). Role of
siderophore biosynthesis in virulence of Staphylococcus aureus: identiﬁcation
and characterization of genes involved in production of a siderophore. Infect.
Immun. 72, 29–37. doi: 10.1128/IAI.72.1.29-37.2004
Fall, R., and Benson, A. A. (1996). Leaf methanol the simplest natural product from
plants. Trends Plant Sci. 1, 296–301. doi: 10.1016/S1360-1385(96)88175-0
Fujita, M., Mori, K., Hara, H., Hishiyama, S., Kamimura, N., and Masai, E. (2019).
A TonB-dependent receptor constitutes the outer membrane transport system
for a lignin-derived aromatic compound. Commun. Biol. 2, 1–10. doi: 10.1038/
s42003-019-0676-z
Fukushima, T., Sia, A. K., Allred, B. E., Nichiporuk, R., Zhou, Z., Andersen, U. N.,
et al. (2012). Bacillus cereus iron uptake protein ﬁshes out an unstable ferric
citrate trimer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 16829–16834. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1210131109
Hancock, V., Ferrières, L., and Klemm, P. (2008). The ferric yersiniabactin uptake
receptor FyuA is required for eﬃcient bioﬁlm formation by urinary tract
infectious Escherichia coli in human urine. Microbiology 154, 167–175. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/011981-0
Haque, M. F., Kalidass, B., Bandow, N., Turpin, E. A., DiSpirito, A. A., and
Semrau, J. D. (2015). Cerium regulates expression of alternative methanol
dehydrogenases in Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
81, 7546–7552. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02542-15
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

## Page 14

Juma et al.
Methylobacterium aquaticum Lanthanophore/Siderophore
Keltjens, J. T., Pol, A., Reimann, J., and Op Den Camp, H. J. M. (2014). PQQdependent methanol dehydrogenases: rare-earth elements make a diﬀerence.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98, 6163–6183. doi: 10.1007/s00253-014-5766-8
Knief, C., Ramette, A., Frances, L., Alonso-Blanco, C., and Vorholt, J. A. (2010).
Site and plant species are important determinants of the Methylobacterium
community composition in the plant phyllosphere. ISME J. 4, 719–728. doi:
10.1038/ismej.2010.9
Kramer, J., Özkaya, Ö, and Kümmerli, R. (2021). Bacterial siderophores in
community and host interactions. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 18, 152–163. doi: 10.
1038/s41579-019-0284-4
Kumar, M., Kour, D., Yadav, A. N., Saxena, R., Rai, P. K., Jyoti, A., et al. (2019).
Biodiversity of methylotrophic microbial communities and their potential role
in mitigation of abiotic stresses in plants. Biologia (Bratisl) 74, 287–308. doi:
10.2478/s11756-019-00190-6
Lacava, P. T., Silva-Stenico, M. E., Araújo, W. L., Simionato, A. V. C., Carrilho,
E., Siu, M. T., et al. (2008). Detection of siderophores in endophytic bacteria
Methylobacterium spp. associated with Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca. Pesqui
Agropecu Bras 43, 521–528. doi: 10.1590/S0100-204X2008000400011
Li, C., Zhu, L., Pan, D., Li, S., Xiao, H., Zhang, Z., et al. (2019). Siderophoremediated iron acquisition enhances resistance to oxidative and aromatic
compound stress in Cupriavidus necator JMP134. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 85,
1–18. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01938-18
Ling, N., Raza, W., Ma, J., Huang, Q., and Shen, Q. (2011). Identiﬁcation and role of
organic acids in watermelon root exudates for recruiting Paenibacillus polymyxa
SQR-21 in the rhizosphere. Eur. J. Soil Biol. 47, 374–379. doi: 10.1016/j.ejsobi.
2011.08.009
Louden, B. C., Haarmann, D., and Lynne, A. M. (2011). Use of blue agar CAS assay
for siderophore detection. J. Microbiol. Biol. Educ. 12, 51–53. doi: 10.1128/jmbe.
v12i1.249
Marx, C. J., and Lidstrom, M. E. (2001). Development of improved versatile broadhost-range vectors for use in methylotrophs and other gram-negative bacteria.
Microbiology 147, 2065–2075. doi: 10.1099/00221287-147-8-2065
Masuda, S., Suzuki, Y., Fujitani, Y., Mitsui, R., Nakagawa, T., Shintani,
M., et al. (2018). Lanthanide-dependent regulation of methylotrophy in
Methylobacterium aquaticum strain 22A. mSphere 3, 1–16. doi: 10.1128/
msphere.00462-17
Mazoy, R., Botana, L. M., and Lemos, M. L. (1997). Iron uptake from ferric citrate
by Vibrio anguillarum. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 154, 145–150. doi: 10.1016/S03781097(97)00316-9
Muhammad, M. H., Idris, A. L., Fan, X., Guo, Y., Yu, Y., Jin, X., et al. (2020). Beyond
risk: bacterial bioﬁlms and their regulating approaches. Front. Microbiol. 11:928.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00928
Neubauer, U., Nowack, B., Furrer, G., and Schulin, R. (2000). Heavy metal sorption
on clay minerals aﬀected by the siderophore desferrioxamine B. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 34, 2749–2755. doi: 10.1021/es990495w
Nobre, L. S., and Saraiva, L. M. (2014). Role of the siderophore transporter SirABC
in the Staphylococcus aureus resistance to oxidative stress. Curr. Microbiol. 69,
164–168. doi: 10.1007/s00284-014-0567-y
Noinaj, N., Guillier, M., Barnard, T. J., and Buchanan, S. K. (2010). TonBdependent transporters: regulation, structure, and function. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 64, 43–60. doi: 10.1146/annurev.micro.112408.134247
O’Toole, G. A. (2011). Microtiter dish bioﬁlm formation assay. J. Vis. Exp. 47:e2437.
doi: 10.3791/2437
Oliveira, F., França, Â, and Cerca, N. (2017). Staphylococcus epidermidis is largely
dependent on iron availability to form bioﬁlms. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 307,
552–563. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2017.08.009
Omer, Z. S., Tombolini, R., and Gerhardson, B. (2004). Plant colonization by pinkpigmented facultative methylotrophic bacteria (PPFMs). FEMS Microbiol. Ecol.
47, 319–326. doi: 10.1016/S0168-6496(04)00003-0
Rellán-Álvarez, R., Giner-Martínez-Sierra, J., Orduna, J., Orera, I., RodríguezCastrilln, J. Á, García-Alonso, J. I., et al. (2010). Identiﬁcation of a tri-iron(III),
tri-citrate complex in the xylem sap of iron-deﬁcient tomato resupplied with
iron: new insights into plant iron long-distance transport. Plant Cell Physiol.
51, 91–102. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcp170
Roszczenko-Jasi´nska, P., Vu, H. N., Subuyuj, G. A., Crisostomo, R. V.,
Cai,
J.,
Lien,
N.
F.,
et
al.
(2020).
Gene
products
and
processes
contributing
to
lanthanide
homeostasis
and
methanol
metabolism
in
Methylorubrum extorquens AM1. Sci. Rep. 10, 2–4. doi: 10.1038/s41598-02069401-4
Sah,
S.,
and
Singh,
R.
(2015).
Siderophore:
structural
and
functional
characterisation
–
a
comprehensive
review.
Agriculture
61,
97–114.
doi: 10.1515/agri-2015-0015
Sy, A., Timmers, A. C. J., Knief, C., and Vorholt, J. A. (2005). Methylotrophic
metabolism
is
advantageous
for
Methylobacterium
extorquens
during
colonization of Medicago truncatula under competitive conditions. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 71, 7245–7252. doi: 10.1128/AEM.71.11.7245-7252.2005
Tani, A., Ogura, Y., Hayashi, T., and Kimbara, K. (2016). Complete genome
sequence of Methylobacterium aquaticum strain 22A, isolated from a
Racomitrium japonicum moss. Genome Announc. 3:e00266-15. doi: 10.1128/
genomeA.00266-15
Tani, A., Sahin, N., Fujitani, Y., Kato, A., Sato, K., and Kimbara, K.
(2015). Methylobacterium species promoting rice and barley growth and
interaction speciﬁcity revealed with whole-cell matrix-assisted laser desorption
/ ionization-timeof-ﬂight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/ MS) analysis. PLoS
One 10:e0129509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129509
Tani, A., Takai, Y., Suzukawa, I., Akita, M., Murase, H., and Kimbara, K. (2012).
Practical application of methanol-mediated mutualistic symbiosis between
Methylobacterium species and a roof greening moss, Racomitrium japonicum.
PLoS One 7:e33800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033800
Toledano, M. B., Delaunay, A., Biteau, B., Spector, D., and Azevedo, D. (2003).
Oxidative stress responses in yeast. Springer 1, 241–303. doi: 10.1007/3-54045611-2_6
Vogel, A. I. (1957). Elementary practical organic chemistry. J. Chem. Educ. 10:521.
Vuilleumier, S., Chistoserdova, L., Lee, M. C., Bringel, F., Lajus, A., Yang, Z.,
et al. (2009). Methylobacterium genome sequences: a reference blueprint to
investigate microbial metabolism of C1 compounds from natural and industrial
sources. PLoS One 4:e5584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005584
Wehrmann, M., Billard, P., Martin-Meriadec, A., Zegeye, A., and Klebensberger, J.
(2017). Functional role of lanthanides in enzymatic activity and transcriptional
regulation of pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases in
Pseudomonas putida KT2440. mBio 8, e00570–17. doi: 10.1128/MBIO.0057017
Yanpirat, P., Nakatsuji, Y., Hiraga, S., Fujitani, Y., Izumi, T., Masuda, S.,
et al. (2020). Lanthanide-dependent methanol and formaldehyde oxidation in
Methylobacterium aquaticum strain 22A. Microorganisms 8, 1–17. doi: 10.3390/
microorganisms8060822
Yokosho, K., Yamaji, N., Ueno, D., Mitani, N., and Ma, J. F. (2009). OsFRDL1 is
a citrate transporter required for eﬃcient translocation of iron in rice. Plant
Physiol. 149, 297–305. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.128132
Yuan, J., Zhang, N., Huang, Q., Raza, W., Li, R., Vivanco, J. M., et al. (2015).
Organic acids from root exudates of banana help root colonization of PGPR
strain Bacillus amyloliquefaciens NJN-6. Sci. Rep. 5, 1–8. doi: 10.1038/srep13438
Yurimoto, H., Iguchi, H., Di Thien, D. T., Tani, A., Okumoto, Y., Ota, A., et al.
(2021). Methanol bioeconomy: promotion of rice crop yield in paddy ﬁelds
with microbial cells prepared from natural gas-derived C(1) compound. Microb.
Biotechnol. 14, 1385–1396. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13725
Zytnick, A. M., Good, N. M., Barber, C. C., Phi, M. T., Gutenthaler, S. M., Zhang,
W., et al. (2022). Identiﬁcation of a biosynthetic gene cluster encoding a novel
lanthanide chelator in Methylorubrum extorquens AM1. bioRxiv[Preprint]. doi:
10.1101/2022.01.19.476857
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Juma, Fujitani, Alessa, Oyama, Yurimoto, Sakai and Tani. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 921635

